THE FINKLER QUESTION

Howard Jacobson 

B L O O M S B U R Y 

NEW YORK * BERLIN * LONDON * SYDNEY

To the memory of three dear friends, great givers of laughter

Terry Collits (1940-2009)

Tony Errington (1944-2009)

Graham Rees (1944-2009)

 

 

 

 
 

Who now will set the table on a roar?

Table of Contents

Part One

Part Two

 
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
 

 
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
Eleven
Twelve
Thirteen
 

Epilogue

 

A Note on the Author

By the Same Author

 

 

Praise for The Finkler Question

Part One

ONE

1

He should have seen it coming.

prepared for this one.

His  life  had  been  one  mishap  after  another.  So  he  should  have  been

He  was  a  man  who  saw  things  coming.  Not  shadowy  premon-itions
before  and  after  sleep,  but  real  and  present  dangers  in  the  daylit  world.
Lamp posts and trees reared up at him, splintering his shins. Speeding cars
lost control and rode on to the footpath leaving him lying in a pile of torn
tissue  and  mangled  bones.  Sharp  objects  dropped  from  scaffolding  and
pierced his skull.

Women  worst  of  all.  When  a  woman  of  the  sort  Julian  Treslove  found
beautiful crossed his path it wasn't his body that took the force but his mind.
She shattered his calm.

True, he had no calm, but she shattered whatever calm there was to look

forward to in the future. She was the future.

People  who  see  what's  coming  have  faulty  chronology,  that  is  all.
Treslove's clocks were all wrong. He no sooner saw the woman than he saw
the aftermath of her - his marriage proposal and her acceptance, the home
they would set up together, the drawn rich silk curtains leaking purple light,
the bed sheets billowing like clouds, the wisp of aromatic smoke winding
from the chimney - only for every wrack of it - its lattice of crimson roof
tiles,  its  gables  and  dormer  windows,  his  happiness,  his  future  -  to  come
crashing down on him in the moment of her walking past.

She didn't leave him for another man, or tell him she was sick of him and
of their life together, she passed away in a perfected dream of tragic love -
consumptive,  wet-eyelashed,  and  as  often  as  not  singing  her  goodbyes  to
him in phrases borrowed from popular Italian opera.

There was no child. Children spoilt the story.
Between  the  rearing  lamp  posts  and  the  falling  masonry  he  would
sometimes catch himself rehearsing his last words to her - also as often as
not  borrowed  from  the  popular  Italian  operas  -  as  though  time  had

concertinaed, his heart had smashed, and she was dying even before he had
met her.

There  was  something  exquisite  to  Treslove  in  the  presentiment  of  a
woman he loved expiring in his arms. On occasions he died in hers, but her
dying in his was better. It was how he knew he was in love: no presentiment
of her expiry, no proposal.

That was the poetry of his life. In reality it had all been women accusing

him of stifling their creativity and walking out on him.

In reality there had even been children.
But beyond the reality something beckoned.
 

On a school holiday in Barcelona he paid a gypsy fortune-teller to read his
hand.

'I see a woman,' she told him.
Treslove was excited. 'Is she beautiful?'
'To me, no,' the gypsy told him. 'But to you . . . maybe. I also see danger.'
Treslove was more excited still. 'How will I know when I have met her?'
'You will know.'
'Does she have a name?'
'As a rule, names are extra,' the gypsy said, bending back his thumb. 'But
I will make an exception for you because you are young. I see a Juno - do
you know a Juno?'

She pronounced it 'Huno'. But only when she remembered.
Treslove closed one eye. Juno? Did he know a Juno? Did anyone know a

Juno? No, sorry, no, he didn't. But he knew a June.

'No, no, bigger than June.' She seemed annoyed with him for not being
able  to  do  bigger  than  June.  'Judy  .  .  .  Julie  .  .  .  Judith.  Do  you  know  a
Judith?'

Hudith.
Treslove shook his head. But he liked the sound of it - Julian and Judith.

Hulian and Hudith Treslove.

'Well, she's waiting for you, this Julie or Judith or Juno . . . I do still see a

Juno.'

Treslove closed his other eye. Juno, Juno . . .
'How long will she wait?' he asked.
'As long as it takes you to find her.'

Treslove imagined himself looking, searching the seven seas. 'You said

you see danger. How is she dangerous?'

He  saw  her  rearing  up  at  him,  with  a  knife  to  his  throat  -  Addio,  mio

 

bello, addio.

'I did not say it was she who was dangerous. Only that I saw danger. It
might  be  you  who  is  dangerous  to  her.  Or  some  other  person  who  is
dangerous to both of you.'

'So should I avoid her?' Treslove asked.
She shuddered a fortune-teller's shudder. 'You cannot avoid her.'
She  was  beautiful  herself.  At  least  in  Treslove's  eyes.  Emaciated  and
tragic  with  gold  hooped  earrings  and  a  trace,  he  thought,  of  a  West
Midlands accent. But for the accent he would have been in love with her.

She didn't tell him anything he didn't already know. Someone, something,
was in store for him.

Something of more moment than a mishap.
He was framed for calamity and sadness but was always somewhere else
when  either  struck.  Once,  a  tree  fell  and  crushed  a  person  walking  just  a
half a yard behind him. Treslove heard the cry and wondered whether it was
his own. He missed a berserk gunman on the London Underground by the
length of a single carriage. He wasn't even interviewed by the police. And a
girl he had loved with a schoolboy's hopeless longing - the daughter of one
of his father's friends, an angel with skin as fine as late-summer rose petals
and eyes that seemed forever wet - died of leukaemia in her fourteenth year
while Treslove was in Barcelona having his fortune told. His family did not
call him back for her final hours or even for the funeral. They did not want
to spoil his holiday, they told him, but the truth was they did not trust his
fortitude. People who knew Treslove thought twice about inviting him to a
deathbed or a burial.

So life was still all his to lose. He was, at forty-nine, in good physical
shape, had not suffered a bruise since falling against his mother's knee in
infancy,  and  was  yet  to  be  made  a  widower.  To  his  know-ledge,  not  a
woman he had loved or known sexually had died, few having stayed long
enough  with  him  anyway  for  their  dying  to  make  a  moving  finale  to
anything that could be called a grand affair. It gave him a preternaturally
youthful look - this unconsummated expectation of tragic event. The look
which people born again into their faith sometimes acquire.

2

It was a warm late-summer's evening, the moon high and skittish. Treslove
was returning from a melancholy dinner with a couple of old friends, one
his  own  age,  one  much  older,  both  recently  made  widowers.  For  all  the
hazards  of  the  streets,  he  had  decided  to  walk  a  little  around  a  part  of
London he knew well, mulling over the sadness of the night in retrospect,
before taking a cab home.

A  cab,  not  a  Tube,  though  he  lived  only  a  hundred  yards  from  a  Tube
station.  A  man  as  fearful  as  Treslove  of  what  might  befall  him  above
ground  was  hardly  going  to  venture  beneath  it.  Not  after  the  close  shave
with the gunman.

'How unutterably sad,' he said, not quite aloud. He meant the death of his
friends' wives and the death of women generally. But he was also thinking
of the men who had been left alone, himself included. It is terrible to lose a
woman you have loved, but it is no less a loss to have no woman to take
into your arms and cradle before tragedy strikes . . .

'Without that, what am I for?' he asked himself, for he was a man who did

not function well on his own.

He  passed  the  BBC,  an  institution  for  which  he  had  once  worked  and
cherished idealistic hopes but which he now hated to an irrational degree.
Had it been rational he would have taken steps not to pass the building as
often as he did. Under his breath he cursed it feebly - 'Shitheap,' he said.

A nursery malediction.
That was exactly what he hated about the BBC: it had infantilised him.
'Auntie', the nation called the Corporation, fondly. But aunties are equivocal
figures of affection, wicked and unreliable, pretending love only so long as
they  are  short  of  love  themselves,  and  then  off.  The  BBC,  Treslove
believed, made addicts of those who listened to it, reducing them to a state
of inane dependence. As it did those it employed. Only worse in the case of
those it employed - handcuffing them in promotions and conceit, disabling
them  from  any  other  life.  Treslove  himself  a  case  in  point.  Though  not
promoted, only disabled.

There were cranes up around the building, as high and unsteady as the
moon. That would be a shapely fate, he thought: as in my beginning, so in
my end - a BBC crane dashing my brains out. The shitheap. He could hear
the tearing of his skull, like the earth's skin opening in a disaster movie. But

then  life  was  a  disaster  movie  in  which  lovely  women  died,  one  after
another.  He  quickened  his  pace.  A  tree  reared  up  at  him.  Swerving,  he
almost walked into a fallen road mender's sign. DANGER. His shins ached
with the imagined collision. Tonight even his soul shook with apprehension.
It's never where you look for it, he told himself. It always comes from
somewhere  else.  Whereupon  a  dark  shadow  materialised  from  a  doorway
into an assailant, took him by the neck, pushed him face first against a shop
window, told him not to shout or struggle, and relieved him of his watch,
his wallet, his fountain pen and his mobile phone.

It  was  only  when  he  had  stopped  shaking  and  was  able  to  check  his
pockets  and  find  them  emptied  that  he  could  be  certain  that  what  had
happened had happened in reality.

No wallet, no mobile phone.
In his jacket pocket no fountain pen.
On his wrist no watch.
And in himself no fight, no instinct for preservation, no amour de soi, no
whatever the word is for the glue that holds a man together and teaches him
to live in the present.

But then when had he ever had that?
 

He'd  been  a  modular,  bits-and-pieces  man  at  university,  not  studying
anything recognisable as a subject but fitting components of different arts-
related  disciplines,  not  to  say  indisciplines,  together  like  Lego  pieces.
Archaeology,  Concrete  Poetry,  Media  and  Communications,  Festival  and
Theatre  Administration,  Comparative  Religion,  Stage  Set  and  Design,  the
Russian Short Story, Politics and Gender. On finishing his studies - and it
was never entirely clear when and whether he had finished his studies, on
account of no one at the university being certain how many modules made a
totality  -  Treslove  found  himself  with  a  degree  so  unspecific  that  all  he
could do with it was accept a graduate traineeship at the BBC. For its part -
her part - all the BBC could do with Treslove when she got him was shunt
him into producing late-night arts programmes for Radio 3.

He felt himself to be a stunted shrub in a rainforest of towering trees. All
around him other trainees rose to startling eminence within weeks of their
arriving. They shot up, because there was no other direction you could go
but up, unless you were Treslove who stayed where he was because no one
knew he was there. They became programme controllers, heads of stations,

acquisitors, multi-platform executives, director generals even. No one ever
left. No one was ever fired. The Corporation looked after its own with more
fierce loyalty than a family of mafiosi. As a consequence everyone knew
one another intimately - except Treslove who knew no one - and spoke the
same language - except Treslove, who spoke a language of loss and sorrow
nobody understood.

'Cheer up,' people would say to him in the canteen. But all that did was
make him want to cry. Such a sad expression, 'Cheer up'. Not only did it
concede  the  improbability  that  he  ever  would  cheer  up,  it  accepted  that
there could be nothing much to cheer up for if cheering up was all there was
to look forward to.

He  was  reprimanded  on  an  official  letterhead  by  someone  from  the
Creative  Board  -  he  didn't  recognise  the  complainant's  name  -  for
addressing too many morbid issues and playing too much mournful music
on his programme. 'That's the province of Radio 3,' the letter concluded. He
wrote back saying his programme was on Radio 3. He received no reply.

After  more  than  a  dozen  years  roaming  the  ghostly  corridors  of
Broadcasting House in the dead of night, knowing that no one was listening
to anything he produced - for who, at three o'clock in the morning, wanted
to hear live poets discussing dead poets, who might just as well have been
dead poets discussing live poets? - he resigned. 'Would anyone notice if my
programmes  weren't  aired?'  he  wrote  in  his  letter  of  resignation.  'Would
anyone  be  aware  of  my  absence  if  I  just  stopped  turning  up?'  Again  he
received no reply.

Auntie wasn't listening either.
He answered an advertisement in a newspaper for an assistant director of
a newly launched arts festival on the south coast. 'Newly launched' meant a
school  library  which  had  no  books  in  it,  only  computers,  three  visiting
speakers and no audience. It reminded him of the BBC. The actual director
rewrote  all  his  letters  in  simpler  English  and  did  the  same  with  his
conversation. They fell out over the wording of a brochure.

'Why say exhilarating when you can say sexy?' she asked him.
'Because an arts festival isn't sexy.'
'And you want to know why that is? Because you insist on using words

like exhilarating.'

'What's wrong with it?'
'It's indirect language.'

'There's nothing indirect about exhilaration.'
'There is the way you say it.'
'Could we try for a compromise with exuberance?' he asked, without any.
'Could we try for a compromise with you getting another job?'
They  had  been  sleeping  together.  There  was  nothing  else  to  do.  They
coupled  on  the  gymnasium  floor  when  no  one  turned  up  to  their  festival.
She wore Birkenstocks even during lovemaking. He only realised he loved
her when she sacked him.

Her name was Julie and he only noticed that when she sacked him, too.
Hulie.
Thereafter he gave up on a career in the arts and filled a succession of
unsuitable  vacancies  and  equally  unsuitable  women,  falling  in  love
whenever he took up a new job, and falling out of love - or more correctly
being fallen out of love with - every time he moved on. He drove a removal
van, falling in love with the first woman whose house he emptied, delivered
milk in an electric float, falling in love with the cashier who paid him every
Friday  night,  worked  as  an  assistant  to  an  Italian  carpenter  who  replaced
sash  windows  in  Victorian  houses  and  replaced  Julian  Treslove  in  the
affections of the cashier, managed a shoe department in a famous London
store, falling in love with the woman who managed soft furnishings on the
floor above, finally finding semi-permanent and ill-paid occupation with a
theatrical  agency  specialising  in  providing  doubles  of  famous  people  for
parties, conferences and corporate events. Treslove didn't look like anybody
famous in particular, but looked like many famous people in general, and so
was  in  demand  if  not  by  virtue  of  verisimilitude,  at  least  by  virtue  of
versatility.

And  the  soft-furnishings  woman?  She  left  him  when  he  became  the
double of no one in particular. 'I don't like not knowing who you're meant to
be,' she told him. 'It reflects badly on us both.'

'You choose,' he said.
'I don't want to choose. I want to know. I crave certainty. I need to know
you're going to be there through thick and thin. I work with fluff all day.
When  I  come  home  I  want  something  solid.  It's  a  rock  I  need,  not  a
chameleon.'

She had red hair and angry skin. She heated up so quickly Treslove had

always been frightened to get too near to her.

'I am a rock,' he insisted, from a distance. 'I will be with you to the end.'

'Well, you're right about that at least,' she told him. 'This is the end. I'm

leaving you.'

'Just because I'm in demand?'
'Because you're not in demand with me.'
'Please don't leave. If I wasn't a rock before, I'll be a rock from now on.'
'You won't. It isn't in your nature.'
'Don't I look after you when you're ill?'
'You  do.  You're  marvellous  to  me  when  I'm  ill.  It's  when  I'm  well  that

 

you're no use.'

He begged her not to go. Took his chance and threw his arms around her,

weeping into her neck.
'Some rock,' she said.
Her name was June.
Demand  is  a  relative  concept.  He  wasn't  so  much  in  demand  as  a
lookalike for everybody and nobody that there weren't many vacant hours in
which to think about all that had befallen him, or rather all that hadn't, about
women and the sadness he felt for them, about his loneliness, and about that
absence  in  him  for  which  he  didn't  have  the  word.  His  incompletion,  his
untogetherness, his beginning waiting for an end, or was it his end waiting
for a beginning, his story waiting for a plot.

It  was  exactly  11.30  p.m.  when  the  attack  occurred.  Treslove  knew  that
because  something  had  made  him  look  at  his  watch  the  moment  before.
Maybe the foreknowledge that he would never look at it again. But with the
brightness of the street lamps and the number of commercial properties lit
up  -  a  hairdresser's  was  still  open  and  a  dim  sum  restaurant  and  a
newsagent's having a refit - it could have been afternoon. The streets were
not deserted. At least a dozen people might have come to Treslove's rescue,
but  none  did.  Perhaps  the  effrontery  of  the  assault  -  just  a  hundred  yards
from Regent Street, almost within cursing distance of the BBC - perplexed
whoever saw it. Perhaps they thought the participants were playing or had
become embroiled in a domestic row on the way home from a restaurant or
the theatre. They could - there was the strange part - have been taken for a
couple.

That was what Treslove found most galling. Not the interruption to one
of  his  luxuriating,  vicariously  widowed  reveries.  Not  the  shocking
suddenness of the attack, a hand seizing him by the back of his neck and

shoving  him  so  hard  into  the  window  of  Guivier's  violin  shop  that  the
instruments  twanged  and  vibrated  behind  the  shattering  pane,  unless  the
music he heard was the sound of his nose breaking. And not even the theft
of his watch, his wallet, his fountain pen and his mobile phone, sentimental
as his attachment to the first of those was, and inconvenient as would be the
loss of the second, third and fourth. No, what upset him beyond all these
was the fact that the person who had robbed, assaulted and, yes, terrified
him - a person against whom he put up not a whisper of a struggle - was . . .
a woman.

3

Until  the  assault,  Treslove's  evening  had  been  sweetly  painful  but  not
depressing. Though they complained of being without compass or purpose
on their own, the three men - the two widowers and Treslove, who counted
as  an  honorary  third  -  enjoyed  one  another's  company,  argued  about  the
economy and world affairs, remembered jokes and anecdotes from the past,
and  almost  managed  to  convince  themselves  they'd  gone  back  to  a  time
before they had wives to lose. It was a dream, briefly, their falling in love,
the children they'd fathered - Treslove had inadvertently fathered two that
he  knew  of  -  and  the  separations  that  had  devastated  them.  No  one  they
loved had left them because they had loved no one yet. Loss was a thing of
the future.

Then again, who were they fooling?
After  dinner,  Libor  Sevcik,  at  whose  apartment  between  Broadcasting
House  and  Regent's  Park  they  dined,  sat  at  the  piano  and  played  the
Schubert Impromptus Opus 90 his wife Malkie had loved to play. Treslove
thought he would die with grief for his friend. He didn't know how Libor
had survived Malkie's death. They had been married for more than half a
century. Libor was now approaching his ninetieth year. What could there be
left for him to live for?

Malkie's music, maybe. Libor had never once sat at the piano while she
was alive - the piano stool was sacred to her, he would as soon sit on it as
burst in on her in the lavatory - but many a time he had stood behind her
while  she  played,  in  the  early  days  accompanying  her  on  the  fiddle,  but
later, at her quiet insistence ('Tempo, Libor, tempo!'), standing behind her
without  his  fiddle,  marvelling  at  her  expertise,  at  the  smell  of  aloes  and

frankincense (all the perfumes of Arabia) that rose from her hair, and at the
beauty of her neck. A neck more graceful, he had told her the day they had
met, than a swan's. Because of his accent, Malkie had thought he had said
her  neck  was  more  graceful  than  a  svontz,  which  had  reminded  her  of  a
Yiddish word her father often used, meaning penis. Could Libor really have
meant that her neck was more graceful than a penis?

Had  she  not  married  Libor,  or  so  the  family  mythology  had  it,  Malkie
Hofmannsthal  would  in  all  likelihood  have  gone  on  to  be  a  successful
concert  pianist.  Horowitz  heard  her  play  Schubert  in  a  drawing  room  in
Chelsea  and  commended  her.  She  played  the  pieces  as  they  should  be
played,  he  said,  as  though  Schubert  were  inventing  as  he  went  along  -
emotional  improvisations  with  a  bracing  undernote  of  intellectuality.  Her
family regretted her marriage for many reasons, not the least of them being
Libor's lack of intellectuality and breeding, his low journalistic tone, and the
company  he  kept,  but  mostly  they  regretted  it  on  account  of  the  musical
future she threw away.

'Why  can't  you  marry  Horowitz  if  you  have  to  marry  someone?'  they

'He  is  twice  my  age,'  Malkie  told  them.  'You  might  as  well  ask  why  I

asked her.

don't marry Schubert.'

'So who said a husband can't be twice your age? Musicians live for ever.

And if you do outlive him, well . . .'

'He doesn't make me laugh,' she said. 'Libor makes me laugh.'
She could have added that Horowitz was already married to Toscanini's

daughter.

And that Schubert had died of syphilis.
She never once regretted her decision. Not when she heard Horowitz play
at Carnegie Hall - her parents had paid for her to go to America to forget
Libor and bought her front-row seats so that Horowitz shouldn't miss her -
not  when  Libor  won  a  measure  of  renown  as  a  show-business  journalist,
travelling to Cannes and Monte Carlo and Hollywood without her, not when
he fell into one of his Czech depressions, not even when Marlene Dietrich,
unable  to  figure  out  the  time  anywhere  in  the  world  but  where  she  was,
would  ring  their  London  apartment  from  the  Chateau  Marmont  at  three
thirty in the morning, call Libor 'my darling', and sob down the phone.

'I  find  my  entire  fulfilment  in  you,'  Malkie  told  Libor.  There  was  a
rumour  that  Marlene  Dietrich  had  told  him  the  same,  but  he  still  chose

'I will,' she said. 'I will play every day. But only when you're here.'
When he could afford it he bought her a Bechstein concert grand in an
ebonised case. She wanted a Bluthner but he wouldn't have anything in their
apartment manufactured behind the Iron Curtain.

In  their  later  years  she  had  made  him  promise  her  he  would  not  die
before  her,  so  incapable  was  she  of  surviving  an  hour  without  him  -  a
promise he had solemnly kept.

'Laugh at me,' he told Treslove, 'but I got down on one knee to make her
that  promise,  exactly  as  I  did  the  day  I  proposed  to  her.  That  is  the  only
reason I am staying alive now.'

Unable to find words, Treslove got down on one knee himself and kissed

Libor's hand.

Malkie whose neck was more graceful than a svontz.

'You must go on playing,' he insisted, buying her a Steinway upright with

gilded candelabra at an auction in south London.

'We did discuss throwing ourselves off Bitchy 'Ead together if one of us
got seriously sick,' Libor said, 'but Malkie thought I was too light to hit the
sea at the same time she did and she didn't fancy the idea of hanging around
in the water waiting.'

'Bitchy 'Ead?' Treslove wondered.
'Yes. We even drove there for a day out. Daring each other. Lovely spot.
Great spiralling downs with seagulls circling and dead bunches of flowers
tied to barbed-wire fences - one with its price ticket still on, I remember -
and  there  was  a  plaque  with  a  quotation  from  Psalms  about  God  being
mightier than the thunder of many waters and lots of little wooden crosses
planted in the grass. It was probably the crosses that decided us against.'

Treslove  didn't  understand  what  Libor  was  talking  about.  Barbed-wire

fences? Had he and Malkie driven on a suicide pact to Treblinka?

Seagulls, though . . . And crosses . . . Search him.
Malkie and Libor did nothing about it anyway. Malkie was the one who

got seriously sick and they did not a damned thing about it.

Three months after her death, Libor ventured bravely into the eye of his
despair and hired a tutor, who smelt of old letters, cigarettes and Guinness,
to  teach  him  to  play  the  impromptus  which  Malkie  had  interpreted  as
though Schubert were in the room with them (inventing as he went), and
these he played over and over again with four of his favourite photographs
of Malkie on the piano in front of him. His inspiration, his instructress, his

companion, his judge. In one of them she looked unbearably young, leaning
laughing over the pier at Brighton, the sun in her face. In another she wore
her wedding dress. In all of them she had eyes only for Libor.

Julian Treslove wept openly the moment the music began. Had he been
married  to  Malkie  he  didn't  doubt  he  would  have  wept  over  her  beauty
every morning he woke to find her in his bed. And then, when he woke to
find her in his bed no more, he couldn't imagine what he'd have done . . .
Thrown himself off Bitchy 'Ead - why not?

How do you go on living knowing that you will never again - not ever,
ever - see the person you have loved? How do you survive a single hour, a
single  minute,  a  single  second  of  that  knowledge?  How  do  you  hold
yourself together?

He wanted to ask Libor that. 'How did you get through the first night of
being  alone,  Libor?  Did  you  sleep?  Have  you  slept  since?  Or  is  sleep  all
that's left to you?'

But he couldn't. Perhaps he didn't want to hear the answer.
Though  once  Libor  did  say,  'Just  when  you  think  you've  overcome  the

grief, you realise you are left with the loneliness.'

Treslove  tried  to  imagine  a  loneliness  greater  than  his  own.  'Just  when
you get over the loneliness,' he thought, 'you realise you are left with the
grief.'

But then he and Libor were different men.
He was shocked when Libor let him into a secret. At the end they had

used bad language to each other. Really bad language.

'You and Malkie?'
'Me and Malkie. We talked vulgar. It was our defence against pathos.'
Treslove  couldn't  bear  the  thought.  Why  did  anyone  want  a  defence

against pathos?

Libor and Malkie were of the same generation as his parents, both long
deceased.  He  had  loved  his  parents  without  being  close  to  them.  They
would  have  said  the  same  about  him.  The  watch  of  which  he  would  be
divested later that evening was a gift from his ever-anxious mother. 'Jewels
for my Jules,' it was inscribed. But she never called him Jules in life. The
sense  of  being  properly  put  together  which  he  had  lost,  likewise,  was  an
inheritance from his father, a man who stood so straight he created a sort of
architectural  silence  around  himself.  You  could  hang  a  plumb  line  from
him,  Treslove  remembered.  But  he  didn't  believe  his  parents  were  the

reason for the tears he shed in Libor's company. What moved him was this
proof of the destructibility of things; everything exacted its price in the end,
and perhaps happiness exacted it even more cruelly than its opposite.

Was it better then - measuring the loss - not to know happiness at all?
Better to go through life waiting for what never came, because that way you
had less to mourn?

Could  that  be  why  Treslove  so  often  found  himself  alone?  Was  he
protecting  himself  against  the  companioned  happiness  he  longed  for
because he dreaded how he would feel when it was taken from him?

Or was the loss he dreaded precisely the happiness he craved?
Thinking about the causes of his tears only made him cry the more.
The third member of the group, Sam Finkler, did not, throughout Libor's
playing, shed a single tear. The shockingly premature death of his own wife
-  by  horrible  coincidence  in  the  very  same  month  that  Libor  was  made  a
widower - had left him almost more angry than sorrowful. Tyler had never
told  Sam  he  was  her  'entire  fulfilment'.  He  had  loved  her  deeply  all  the
same,  with  an  expectant  and  even  watchful  devotion  -  which  did  not
preclude  other  devotions  on  the  side  -  as  though  he  hoped  she  would
vouchsafe her true feelings for him one day. But she never did. Sam sat by
her bedside throughout her last night. Once she beckoned to him to come
closer. He did as she bade him, putting his ear to her poor dry mouth; but if
she meant to say something tender to him she did not succeed. A gasp of
pain was all he heard. A sound that could just as easily have come from his
own throat.

Theirs,  too,  had  been  a  loving  if  sometimes  fractious  marriage,  and  a
more fruitful one, if you count children, than Libor and Malkie's, but Tyler
had always struck Sam as withheld or secretive somehow. Perhaps faithless,
he didn't know. He might not have minded had he known. He didn't know
that either. He was never given the opportunity to find out. And now her
secrets were, as they say, buried with her. There were tears in Sam Finkler,
but he was as watchful of them as he had been of his wife. Were he to weep
he wanted to be certain he wept out of love, not anger. So it was preferable -
at least until he grew better acquainted with his grief - not to weep at all.

And anyway, Treslove had tears enough for all of them.
 

Julian Treslove and Sam Finkler had been at school together. More rivals
than  friends,  but  rivalry  too  can  last  a  lifetime.  Finkler  was  the  cleverer.

Samuel,  he  insisted  on  being  called  then.  'My  name's  Samuel,  not  Sam.
Sam's a private investigator's name. Samuel was a prophet.'

Samuel Ezra Finkler - how could he be anything but cleverer with a name

It was to Finkler that Treslove had gone running in high excitement after
he'd had his future told on holiday in Barcelona. Treslove and Finkler were
sharing a room. 'Do you know anyone called Juno?' Treslove asked.

'J'you know Juno?' Finkler replied, making inexplicable J noises between

like that?

his teeth.

Treslove didn't get it.
'J'you know Juno? Is that what you're asking me?'
Treslove still didn't get it. So Finkler wrote it down. D'Jew know Jewno?
Treslove shrugged. 'Is that supposed to be funny?'
'It is to me,' Finkler said. 'But please yourself.'
'Is it funny for a Jew to write the word Jew? Is that what's funny?'
'Forget it,' Finkler said. 'You wouldn't understand.'
'Why  wouldn't  I  understand?  If  I  wrote  Non-Jew  don't  know  what  Jew

know I'd be able to tell you what's funny about it.'

'There's nothing funny about it.'
'Exactly. Non-Jews don't find it hilarious to see the word Non-Jew. We

aren't amazed by the written fact of our identity.'
'And d'Jew know why that is?' Finkler asked.
'Go fuck yourself,' Treslove told him.
'And that's Non-Jew humour, is it?'
Before he met Finkler, Treslove had never met a Jew. Not knowingly at
least. He supposed a Jew would be like the word Jew - small and dark and
beetling.  A  secret  person.  But  Finkler  was  almost  orange  in  colour  and
spilled  out  of  his  clothes.  He  had  extravagant  features,  a  prominent  jaw,
long arms and big feet for which he had trouble finding wide enough shoes,
even at fifteen. (Treslove noticed feet; his were dainty like a dancer's.) What
is more - and everything was more on Finkler - he had a towering manner
that made him look taller than he actually was, and delivered verdicts on
people and events with such assurance that he almost spat them out of his
mouth.  'Say  it,  don't  spray  it,'  other  boys  sometimes  said  to  him,  though
they took their lives in their hands when they did. If this was what all Jews
looked like, Treslove thought, then Finkler, which sounded like Sprinkler,

was  a  better  name  for  them  than  Jew.  So  that  was  what  he  called  them
privately - Finklers.

He would have liked to tell his friend this. It took away the stigma, he
thought.  The  minute  you  talked  about  the  Finkler  Question,  say,  or  the
Finklerish Conspiracy, you sucked out the toxins. But he was never quite
able to get around to explaining this to Finkler himself.

They  were  both  the  sons  of  uppity  shopkeepers.  Treslove's  father  sold
cigars and smoking accoutrements, Finkler's pharmaceuticals. Sam Finkler's
father  was  famous  for  dispensing  pills  which  reinvigorated  people
apparently at death's door. They took his pills and their hair grew back, their
backs  straightened,  their  biceps  swelled.  Finkler  senior  was  himself  a
walking miracle, a one-time stomach cancer patient now become the living
proof  of  what  his  pills  were  capable  of  achieving.  He  would  invite
customers to his pharmacy, no matter what their ailments, to punch him in
the  stomach.  Right  where  his  cancer  had  once  been.  'Harder,'  he'd  say.
'Punch me harder. No, no good, I still don't feel a thing.'

And then when they marvelled at his strength he would produce his box

of pills. 'Three a day, with meals, and you too will never feel pain again.'

For all the circus hocus-pocus he was a religious man who wore a black
fedora, was an active member of his synagogue, and prayed to God to keep
him alive.

Julian  Treslove  knew  he  would  never  be  clever  in  a  Finklerish  way.
D'Jew know Jewno . . . He'd never be able to come up with anything like
that. His brain worked at a different temperature. It took him longer to make
his  mind  up  and  no  sooner  did  he  make  his  mind  up  than  he  wanted  to
change it again. But he was, he believed, and perhaps for that reason, the
more boldly imaginative of the two. He would come to school balancing his
night's dreams like an acrobat bearing a human pyramid on his shoulders.
Most  of  them  were  about  being  left  alone  in  vast  echoing  rooms,  or
standing over empty graves, or watching houses burn. 'What do you think
that  was  about?'  he'd  ask  his  friend.  'Search  me,'  was  Finkler's  invariable
reply. As though he had more important things to think about. Finkler never
dreamed.  On  principle,  it  sometimes  seemed  to  Treslove,  Finkler  never
dreamed.

Unless he was just too tall to dream.
So  Treslove  had  to  figure  out  his  own  dreams  for  himself.  They  were
about being in the wrong place at the wrong time. They were about being

Huno.
He  also  dreamed  about  misplacing  things  and  never  being  able  to  find
them  despite  the  most  desperate  searches  in  unlikely  places  -  behind
skirting boards, inside his father's violin, between the pages of a book even
when  what  he  was  looking  for  was  bigger  than  the  book.  Sometimes  the
sensation  of  having  misplaced  something  precious  lasted  throughout  the
day.

Libor, more than three times their age when they met him, had turned up
out of the blue - he really did look, in his maroon velvet suit and matching
bow tie, as though he'd pushed open the wrong door, like Treslove in his
dreams - to teach them European history, though mainly what he wanted to
talk  to  them  about  was  communist  oppression  (from  which  he'd  had  the
foresight  to  flee  in  1948,  just  before  it  sunk  its  claws  into  his  country),
Hussite Bohemia and the part played by windows in Czech history. Julian
Treslove thought he had said 'widows' and became agitated.

too late, unless they were about being too early. They were about waiting
for an axe to fall, a bomb to drop, a dangerous woman to dabble her fingers
in his heart. Julie, Judith, Juno . . .

'Widows in Czech history, sir?'
'Windows, chlapec, windows!'
He  had  been  a  journalist  of  sorts  in  his  own  country,  a  well-connected
film  critic  and  gossip  columnist,  and  then  again,  as  Egon  Slick,  a
showbusiness  commentator  in  Hollywood,  squiring  beautiful  actresses
around  the  bars  of  Sunset  Boulevard,  and  writing  about  them  for  the
glamour-starved English press, yet now here he was teaching the absurdities
of Czech history to English schoolboys in a north London Grammar School.
If anything could be more existentially absurd than Czech history, it was his
own.

It  was  for  Malkie  that  he'd  relinquished  Hollywood.  She  never
accompanied  him  on  his  assignments,  preferring  to  keep  the  home  fires
burning. 'I like waiting for you,' she told him. 'I love the anticipation of your
return.' But he could tell the anticipation was wearing thin. And there were
material  cares  he  didn't  feel  he  could  leave  her  to  go  on  handling  on  her
own.  He  broke  a  contract  and  argued  with  his  editor.  He  wanted  time  to
write the stories of where he'd been and who he'd met. Teaching gave him
that time.

Pacific  Palisades  to  Highgate,  Garbo  to  Finkler  -  the  trajectory  of  his
career  made  him  laugh  disrespectfully  during  his  own  classes,  which
endeared him to his pupils. Morning after morning he delivered the same
lesson - a denunciation of Hitler and Stalin followed by the First and - 'if
you're well behaved' - the Second Defenestration of Prague. Some days he'd
ask one of the boys to give his lesson for him since they all knew it so well.
When no questions about the First, the Second or indeed Any Subsequent
Defenestrations of Prague appeared on their examination papers, the class
complained to Libor. 'Don't look to me to prepare you for examinations,' he
told them, curling his already curly lip. 'There are plenty of teachers who
can help you get good marks. The point of me is to give you a taste of the
wider world.'

Libor  would  have  liked  to  tell  them  about  Hollywood  but  Hollywood
wasn't on the syllabus. Prague and its defenestrations he could slip in, the
stars and their indiscretions he could not.

He didn't last long. Teachers who wear bow ties and talk about the wider
world  seldom  do.  Six  months  later  he  was  working  for  the  Czech
Department at the World Service by day, and writing biog-raphies of some
of Hollywood's loveliest women by night.

Malkie didn't mind. Malkie adored him and found him funny. Funny was
better than absurd. Her finding him funny kept him sane, 'And you can't say
that about many Czechs,' he joked.

He  continued  to  see  the  two  boys  when  he  had  time.  Their  innocence
diverted him; he had never known boyish innocence himself. He would take
them out to bars they could not afford to go to on their own, mixing them
drinks  they  had  never  before  heard  of  let  alone  tasted,  describing  in
considerable  detail  his  erotic  exploits  -  he  actually  used  the  word  erotic,
snagging  his  tongue  on  it  as  though  the  salaciousness  of  the  syllables
themselves was enough to arouse him - and telling them about the Bohemia
from which he had luckily escaped and expected never to see again.

Of the nations of the free world, only England and America were worth
living in, in Libor's view. He loved England and shopped as he imagined the
English shopped, buying scented tea and Gentleman's Relish at Fortnum &
Mason and his shirts and blazers in Jermyn Street, where he also indulged
in a shave and hot towels soaked in limes as many mornings as he could
manage. Israel, too, he spoke up for, as a Finkler himself, though that was
more about needling people with the fact of its existence, Treslove thought,

than wanting to live there. Whenever Libor said the word Israel he sounded
the 'r' as though there were three of them and let the 'l' fall away to suggest
that the place belonged to the Almighty and he couldn't bring himself fully
to pronounce it. Finklers were like that with language, Treslove understood.
When they weren't playing with it they were ascribing holy properties to it.
Or  the  opposite.  Sam  Finkler  would  eventually  spit  out  Israel-associated
words like Zionist and Tel Aviv and Knesset as though they were curses.

One  day  Libor  told  them  a  secret.  He  was  married.  And  had  been  for
more  than  twenty  years.  To  a  woman  who  looked  like  Ava  Gardner.  A
woman so beautiful that he did not dare bring home his friends to meet her
in case they were blinded by what they saw. Treslove wondered why, since
he hadn't told them about her before, he was telling them about her now.
'Because I think you're ready,' was his answer.

'Ready to go blind?'
'Ready to risk it.'
The real reason was that Malkie had nieces the same age as Treslove and
Finkler,  girls  who  had  trouble  finding  boyfriends.  Nothing  came  of  the
matchmaking - even Treslove couldn't fall in love with Malkie's nieces who
bore not the slightest physical resemblance to her, though he did, of course,
fall  in  love  with  Malkie,  despite  her  being  old  enough  to  be  his  mother.
Libor had not exaggerated. Malkie looked so like Ava Gardner that the boys
canvassed the possibility between them that she was Ava Gardner.

The friendship faded a little after that. Having shown the boys his wife,
Libor had little else to impress them with. And the boys for their part had
Ava Gardners of their own to find.

Shortly  afterwards  the  first  of  the  biographies  was  published,  quickly
followed  by  another.  Juicy  and  amusing  and  slightly  fatalistic.  Libor
became  famous  all  over  again.  Indeed  more  famous  than  he  had  been
before,  because  a  number  of  the  women  he  was  writing  about  were  now
dead and it was thought they had confided more of their secrets to Libor
than to any other man. In several of the photographs, which showed Libor
dancing with them cheek to cheek, you could almost see them spilling their
souls to him. It was because he was funny that they could trust him.

For several years Sam and Julian kept in touch with Libor's progress only
through  these  biographies.  Julian  envied  him.  Sam  less  so.  Word  of
Hollywood 
late-night  corridors  of
Broadcasting House which were home - if a hell can be called a home - to

rarely  penetrated 

the  deserted 

Julian Treslove. And because he considered Libor's career to be the inverse
of his own, he was continuously, if secretly, seduced by it.

Sam  Finkler,  or  Samuel  Finkler  as  he  still  was  then,  had  not  done  a
modular degree at a seaside university. He knew better, he said, which side
his  bread  was  buttered.  Finklerish  of  him,  Treslove  thought  admiringly,
wishing he had the instincts for knowing on which side his own bread was
buttered.

'So what's it going to be?' he asked. 'Medicine? Law? Accountancy?'
'Do you know what that's called?' Finkler asked him.
'What what's called?'
'The thing you're doing.'
'Taking an interest?'
'Stereotyping. You've just stereotyped me.'
'You  said  you  knew  which  side  your  bread  was  buttered.  Isn't  that

stereotyping yourself?'

'I am allowed to stereotype myself,' Finkler told him.
'Ah,' Treslove said. As always he wondered if he would ever get to the
bottom of what Finklers were permitted to say about themselves that non-
Finklers were not.

Unstereotypically  -  to  think  which  was  a  further  form  of  mental
stereotyping,  Treslove  realised  -  Finkler  studied  moral  philosophy  at
Oxford.  Though  this  didn't  appear  an  especially  wise  career  move  at  the
time,  and  his  five  further  years  at  Oxford  teaching  rhetoric  and  logic  to
small  classes  seemed  less  wise  still,  Finkler  justified  his  reputation  for
shrewdness in Treslove's eyes by publishing first one and then another, and
then another and then another, of the self-help practical philosophy books
that made his fortune. The Existentialist in the Kitchen was the first of them.
The Little Book of Household Stoicism was the second. Thereafter Treslove
stopped buying them.

It was at Oxford that Finkler dropped the name Samuel in favour of Sam.
Was  that  because  he  now  wanted  people  to  think  he  was  a  private
investigator?  Treslove  wondered.  Sam  the  Man.  It  crossed  his  mind  that
what his friend didn't want to be thought was a Finkler, but then it would
have  made  more  sense  to  change  the  Finkler  not  the  Samuel.  Perhaps  he
just wanted to sound like a person who was easy to get on with. Which he
wasn't.

In fact, Treslove's intuition that Finkler no longer wanted to be thought a
Finkler  was  the  right  one.  His  father  had  died,  in  great  pain  at  the  last,
miracle pills or no miracle pills. And it had been his father who had kept
him to the Finkler mark. His mother had never quite understood any of it
and  understood  less  now  she  was  on  her  own.  So  that  was  it  for  Finkler.
Enough now with the irrational belief systems. What Treslove couldn't have
understood  was  that  the  Finkler  name  still  meant  something  even  if  the
Finkler  idea  didn't.  By  staying  Finkler,  Finkler  kept  alive  the  backward
sentiment of his faith. By ditching Samuel he forswore the Finkler future.

On the back of the success of his series of practical wisdom guides he
had gone on - his big feet and verbal sprinkling and, in Treslove's view, all-
round unprepossessingness of person notwithstanding - to become a well-
known 
television  personality,  making  programmes  showing  how
Schopenhauer  could  help  people  with  their  love  lives,  Hegel  with  their
holiday  arrangements,  Wittgenstein  with  memorising  pin  numbers.  (And
Finklers with their physical disadvantages, Treslove thought, turning off the
television in irritation.)

'I  know  what  you  all  think  of  me,'  Finkler  pretended  to  apologise  in
company when his success became difficult for those who knew and loved
him to accept, 'but I have to earn money fast in preparation for when Tyler
leaves and takes me for all I've got.' Hoping she would say she loved him
too much to dream of leaving him, but she never did. Which might have
been because she did little else but dream of leaving him.

Whereas  Finkler,  if  Treslove's  supposition  was  correct,  was  too  tall  to

dream of anything.

Though their lives had gone in different directions, they had never lost
contact with each other or with each other's families - in so far as Treslove
could be said to have a family - or with Libor who, first at the height of his
fame,  and  then  as  it  dimmed  and  his  wife's  illness  became  his
preoccupation, would suddenly remember their existence and invite them to
a  party,  a  house-warming,  or  even  the  premiere  of  a  film.  The  first  time
Julian Treslove went to Libor's grand apartment in Portland Place and heard
Malkie play Schubert's Impromptu Opus 90 No. 3 he wept like a baby.

Since then, bereavement had ironed out the differences in their ages and
careers and rekindled their affection. Bereavement - heartless bereavement -
was the reason they were seeing more of one another than they had in thirty
years.

With their women gone, they could become young men again.
For  'gone',  in  Treslove's  sense,  read  gone  as  in  packed  their  bags,  or
found someone less emotionally demanding, or just not yet crossed his path
on the dangerous streets and destroyed his peace of mind.

4

After  dinner,  Julian  had  walked  alone  to  the  gates  of  Regent's  Park  and
looked  inside.  Finkler  had  offered  him  a  lift  but  he  refused  it.  He  didn't
want to sink into the leather of Sam's big black Mercedes and feel envy heat
up his rump. He hated cars but resented Sam his Mercedes and his driver
for nights when he knew he would be drunk - where was the sense in that?
Did he want a Mercedes? No. Did he want a driver for nights when he knew
he would be drunk? No. What he wanted was a wife and Sam no longer had
one of those. So what did Sam have that he hadn't? Nothing.

Except maybe self-respect.
And  that  also  needed  explaining.  How  could  you  make  programmes
associating  Blaise  Pascal  and  French  kissing  and  still  have  self-respect?
Answer - you couldn't.

And yet he did.
Maybe it wasn't self-respect at all. Maybe self didn't enter into it, maybe
it  was  actually  a  freedom  from  self,  or  at  least  from  self  in  the  Treslove
sense of self - a timid awareness of one's small place in a universe ringed by
a barbed-wire fence of rights and limits. What Sam had, like his father the
showman parmaceutical chemist before him, was a sort of obliviousness to
failure, a grandstanding cheek, which Treslove could only presume was part
and parcel of the Finkler heritage. If you were a Finkler you just found it in
your  genes,  along  with  other  Finkler  attributes  it  was  not  polite  to  talk
about.

They barged in, anyway, these Finklers - Libor, too - where non-Finklers
were  hesitant  to  tread.  That  evening,  for  example,  when  they  weren't
listening to music, they had discussed the Middle East, Treslove staying out
of it because he believed he had no right to an opinion on a subject which
wasn't, at least in the way it was to Sam and Libor, any business of his. But
did  they  truly  know  more  than  he  did  -  and  if  they  did,  how  come  they
disagreed about every aspect of the subject - or were they simply unabashed
by their own ignorance?

'Here we go,' Finkler would say whenever the question of Israel arose,
'Holocaust,  Holocaust,'  even  though  Treslove  was  certain  that  Libor  had
never mentioned the Holocaust.

It  was  always  possible,  Treslove  conceded,  that  Jews  didn't  have  to
mention the Holocaust in order to have mentioned the Holocaust. Perhaps
they were able by a glance to thought-transfer the Holocaust to one another.
But Libor didn't look as though he were thought-transferring Holocausts.

And Libor, in his turn, would say, 'Here we go, here we go, more of the
self-hating  Jew  stuff,'  even  though  Treslove  had  never  met  a  Jew,  in  fact
never met anybody, who hated himself less than Finkler did.

Thereafter they went at it as though examining and shredding each other's
evidence  for  the  first  time,  whereas  Treslove,  who  knew  nothing,  knew
they'd been saying the same things for decades. Or at least since Finkler had
gone to Oxford. At school, Finkler had been so ardent a Zionist that when
the Six Day War broke out he tried to enlist in the Israeli air force, though
he was only seven at the time.

'You've  misremembered  what  I  told  you,'  Finkler  corrected  Treslove
when  he  reminded  him  of  that.  'It  was  the  Palestinian  air  force  I  tried  to
enlist for.'

'The Palestinians don't have an air force,' Treslove replied.
'Precisely,' Finkler said.
Libor's position with regard to Israel with three 'r's and no 'l' - Isrrrae -
was what Treslove had heard described as the lifeboat pos-ition. 'No, I've
never been there and don't ever want to go there,' he said, 'but even at my
age the time might not be far away when I have nowhere else to go. That is
history's lesson.'

Finkler did not allow himself to use the word Israel at all. There was no
Israel, there was only Palestine. Treslove had even heard him, on occasions,
refer to it as Canaan. Israelis, however, there had to be, to distinguish the
doers  from  the  done-to.  But  whereas  Libor  pronounced  Israel  as  a  holy
utterance, like the cough of God, Finkler put a seasick 'y' between the 'a'
and the 'e' - Israyelis - as though the word denoted one of the illnesses for
which his father had prescribed his famous pill.

'History's lesson!' he snorted. 'History's lesson is that the Israyelis have
never fought an enemy yet that wasn't made stronger by the fight. History's
lesson is that bullies ultimately defeat themselves.'

'Then why not just wait for that to happen?' Treslove tentatively put in.
He could never quite get whether Finkler resented Israel for winning or for
being about to lose.

Though he detested his fellow Jews for their clannishness about Israel,
Finkler couldn't hide his disdain for Treslove for so much as daring, as an
outsider, to have a view. 'Because of the blood that will be spilled while we
sit and do nothing,' he said, spraying Treslove with his contempt. And then,
to Libor, 'And because as a Jew I am ashamed.'

'Look at him,' Libor said, 'parading his shame to a Gentile world that has

far better things to think about, does it not, Julian?'

'Well,' Treslove began, but that was as much of what the Gentile world

thought as either of them cared to hear.

'By  what  right  do  you  describe  me  as  "parading"  anything?'  Finkler

wanted to know.

But  Libor  persisted  blindly.  'Don't  they  love  you  enough  for  the  books

you write them? Must they love you for your conscience as well?'

'I am not seeking anyone's love. I am seeking justice.'
'Justice? And you call yourself a philosopher! What you are seeking is
the  warm  glow  of  self-righteousness  that  comes  with  saying  the  word.
Listen to me - I used to be your teacher and I'm old enough to be your father
- shame is a private matter. One keeps it to oneself.'

'Ah, yes, the family argument.'
'And what's wrong with the family argument?'
'When  a  member  of  your  family  acts  erroneously,  Libor,  is  it  not  your

duty to tell him?'

family?'

'Tell  him,  yes.  Boycott  him,  no.  What  man  would  boycott  his  own

And so on until the needs of men who lacked the consolations of female
company - another glass of port, another unnecessary visit to the lavatory,
an after dinner snooze - reclaimed them.

Watching  from  the  sidelines,  Treslove  was  enviously  baffled  by  their
Finklerishness.  Such  confidence,  such  certainty  of  right,  whether  or  not
Libor was correct in thinking that all Finkler wanted was for non-Finklers
to approve of him.

Whatever Sam Finkler wanted, his effect on Julian Treslove was always
to put him out of sorts and make him feel excluded from something. And

false to a self he wasn't sure he had. It had been the same at school. Finkler
made him feel like someone he wasn't. Clownish, somehow. Explain that.

Treslove  was  considered  good-looking  in  a  way  that  was  hard  to
describe; he resembled good-looking people. Symmetry was part of it. He
had a symmetrical face. And neatness. He had neat features. And he dressed
well, in the manner of who was it again? Whereas Finkler - whose father
had invited customers to punch him in the belly - had allowed himself to
put  on  weight,  often  let  his  own  belly  hang  out  of  his  shirt,  spat  at  the
camera,  waddled  slightly  on  his  big  feet  when  he  went  on  one  of  those
pointless television walks down the street where the laundry van knocked
down Roland Barthes or through the field where Hobbes had an allotment,
and when he sat down seemed to collapse into his own bulk like a merchant
in a spice souk. And yet he, Treslove, felt the clown!

Did philosophy have something to do with it? Every few years Treslove
decided  it  was  time  he  tried  philosophy  again.  Rather  than  start  at  the
beginning  with  Socrates  or  jump  straight  into  epistemology,  he  would  go
out  and  buy  what  promised  to  be  a  clear  introduction  to  the  subject  -  by
someone  like  Roger  Scruton  or  Bryan  Magee,  though  not,  for  obvious
reasons,  by  Sam  Finkler.  These  attempts  at  self-education  always  worked
well at first. The subject wasn't after all difficult. He could follow it easily.
But then, at more or less the same moment, he would encounter a concept
or a line of reasoning he couldn't follow no matter how many hours he spent
trying to decipher it. A phrase such as 'the idea derived from evolution that
ontogenesis  recapitulates  phylogenesis'  for  example,  not 
impossibly
intricate  in  itself  but  somehow  resistant  to  effort,  as  though  it  triggered
something obdurate and even delinquent in his mind. Or the promise to look
at  an  argument  from  three  points  of  view,  each  of  which  had  five  salient
features,  the  first  of  which  had  four  distinguishable  aspects.  It  was  like
discovering  that  a  supposedly  sane  person  with  whom  one  had  been
enjoying  a  perfect  normal  conversation  was  in  fact  quite  mad.  Or,  if  not
mad, sadistic.

Did  Finkler  ever  encounter  the  same  resistance?  Treslove  asked  him
once.  No,  was  the  answer.  To  Finkler  it  all  made  perfect  sense.  And  the
people who read him found that he too made perfect sense. How else was
one to account for there being so many of them?

It was only when he waved goodbye that it occurred to Treslove that his
old friend wanted company. Libor was right - Finkler was seeking love. A

man without a wife can be lonely in a big black Mercedes, no matter how
many readers he has.

 

Treslove looked up at the moon and let his head spin. He loved these warm
high evenings, solitary and excluded. He took hold of the bars as though he
meant to tear the gates down, but he did nothing violent, just listened to the
park breathe. Anyone watching might have taken him for an inmate of an
institution,  a  prisoner  or  a  madman,  desperate  to  get  out.  But  there  was
another  interpretation  of  his  demeanour:  he  could  have  been  desperate  to
get in.

In the end he needed the gate to keep him upright, so intoxicated was he,
not by Libor's wine, though it had been plentiful enough for three grieving
men, but by the sensuousness of the park's deep exhalations. He opened his
mouth as a lover might, and let the soft foliaged air penetrate his throat.

How  long  since  he  had  opened  his  mouth  for  a  lover  proper?  Really
opened  it,  he  meant,  opened  it  to  gasp  for  air,  to  yell  out  in  gratitude,  to
howl  in  joy  and  dread.  Had  he  run  out  of  women?  He  was  a  lover  not  a
womaniser, so it wasn't as though he had exhausted every suitable candidate
for his affection. But they seemed not to be there any more, or had suddenly
become pity-proof, the sort of women who in the past had touched his heart.
He saw the beauty of the girls who tripped past him on the street, admired
the  strength  in  their  limbs,  understood  the  appeal,  to  other  men,  of  their
reckless impressionability, but they no longer had the lamp-post effect on
him. He couldn't picture them dying in his arms. Couldn't weep for them.
And where he couldn't weep, he couldn't love.

Couldn't even desire.
For Treslove, melancholy was intrinsic to longing. Was that so unusual?
he  wondered.  Was  he  the  only  man  who  held  tightly  to  a  woman  so  he
wouldn't lose her? He didn't mean to other men. In the main he didn't worry
much about other men. That is not to say he had always seen them off - he
was still scarred by the indolent manner in which the Italian who repaired
sash  windows  had  stolen  from  him  -  but  he  wasn't  jealous.  Envy  he  was
capable of, yes - he'd been envious and was envious still of Libor's life lived
mono-erotically  (eloticshrly  was  how  Libor  said  it,  knitting  its  syllables
with his twisted Czech teeth) - but jealousy no. Death was his only serious
rival.

'I have a Mimi Complex,' he told his friends at university. They thought
he was joking or being cute about himself, but he wasn't. He wrote a paper
on  the  subject  for  the  World  Literature  in  Translation  module  he'd  taken
after fluffing Environmental Decision Making - the pretext being the Henri
Murger novel from which the opera La Boheme was adapted. His tutor gave
him A for interpretation and D-for immaturity.

'You'll grow out of it,' he said when Treslove questioned the mark.
Treslove's  mark  was  upgraded  to  A++.  All  marks  were  upgraded  if
students  questioned  them.  And  since  every  student  did  question  them,
Treslove wondered why tutors didn't just dish out regulation A++s and save
time. But he never did grow out of his Mimi Complex. At forty-nine he still
had it bad. Didn't all opera lovers?

And perhaps - like all lovers of Pre-Raphaelite painting, and all readers
of  Edgar  Allan  Poe  -  an  Ophelia  Complex  too.  The  death  betimes  of  a
beautiful woman - what more poetic subject is there?

Whenever  Julian  passed  a  willow  or  a  brook,  or  best  of  all  a  willow
growing  aslant  a  brook  -  which  wasn't  all  that  often  in  London  -  he  saw
Ophelia in the water, her clothes spread wide and mermaidlike, singing her
melodious lay. Too much of water had she right enough - has any woman
ever been more drowned in art? - but he was quick to add his tears to her
inundation.

It was as though a compact had been enjoined upon him by the gods (he
couldn't say God, he didn't believe in God), to possess a woman so wholly
and exclusively, to encircle her in his arms so completely, that death could
find no way in to seize her. He made love in that spirit, in the days when he
made love at all. Desperately, ceaselessly, as though to wear down and drive
away whichever spirits of malevolence had designs upon the woman in his
arms.  Embraced  by  Treslove,  a  woman  could  consider  herself  for  ever
immune from harm. Dog-tired, but safe.

How they slept when he had done with them, the women Treslove had
adored. Sometimes, as he kept vigil over them, he thought they would never
wake.

It was a mystery to him, therefore, why they always left him or made it
impossible for him not to leave them. It was the disappointment of his life.
Framed  to  be  another  Orpheus  who  would  retrieve  his  loved  one  from
Hades, who would, at the last, look back over a lifetime of devotion to her,
shedding tears of unbearable sorrow when she faded for the final time in his

arms - 'My love, my only love!' - here he was instead, passing himself off as
someone  he  wasn't,  a  universal  lookalike  who  didn't  feel  as  others  felt,
reduced  to  swallowing  the  fragrances  of  parks  and  weeping  for  losses
which, in all decency, were not his to suffer.

So  that  was  something  else  he  might  have  envied  Libor  -  his

bereavement.

5

He  stayed  at  the  park  gates  maybe  half  an  hour,  then  strode  back  with
measured steps towards the West End, passing the BBC - his old dead beat -
and Nash's church where he had once fallen in love with a woman he had
watched lighting a candle and crossing herself. In grief, he'd presumed. In
chiaroscuro.  Crepuscular,  like  the  light.  Or  like  himself.  Inconsolable.  So
he'd consoled her.

'It'll be all right,' he told her. 'I'll protect you.'
She had fine cheekbones and almost transparent skin. You could see the

light through her.

After a fortnight of intense consolation, she asked him, 'Why do you keep

telling me it'll be all right? There isn't anything wrong.'

He shook his head. 'I saw you lighting a candle. Come here.'
'I like candles. They're pretty.'
He ran his hands through her hair. 'You like their flicker. You like their

transience. I understand.'

'There's something you should know about me,' she said. 'I'm a bit of an
arsonist.  Not  serious.  I  wasn't  going  to  burn  down  the  church.  But  I  am
turned on by flame.'

He laughed and kissed her face. 'Hush,' he said. 'Hush, my love.'
In the morning he woke to twin realisations. The first was that she had

left him. The second was that his sheets were on fire.

Rather  than  walk  along  Regent  Street  he  turned  left  at  the  church,
stepping inside the columns, brushing its smooth animal roundness with his
shoulder,  and  found  himself  among  the  small  wholesale  fashion  shops  of
Riding House and Little Titchfield Streets, surprised as always at the speed
with  which,  in  London,  one  cultural  or  commercial  activity  gave  way  to
another.  His  father  had  owned  a  cigarette  and  cigar  shop  here  -  Bernard
Treslove: Smokes - so he knew the area and felt fondly towards it. For him it

would  always  smell  of  cigars,  as  his  father  did.  The  windows  of  cheap
jewellery and gaudy handbags and pashminas made him think of romance.
He doubled back on himself, in no hurry to get home, then paused, as he
always paused when he was here, outside J. P. Guivier & Co. - the oldest
violin  dealer  and  restorer  in  the  country.  Though  his  father  played  the
violin, Treslove did not. His father had dissuaded him. 'It will only make
you upset,' he said. 'Forget all that.'

'Forget all what?'
Bernard  Treslove,  bald,  browned,  straight  as  a  plumb  line,  blew  cigar

smoke in his son's face and patted his head affectionately. 'Music.'
'So I can't have a cello, either?' J. P. Guivier sold beautiful cellos.
'The cello will make you even sadder. Go and play football.'
What  Julian  did  was  go  and  read  romantic  novels  and  listen  to
nineteenth-century  operas  instead.  Which  also  didn't  please  his  father,  for
all that the books which Treslove read, like the operas he listened to, were
on his father's shelves.

After this exchange, Bernard Treslove went into his own room to play the
violin. As though he didn't want to set a bad example to his family. Was it
only Treslove's fancy that his father wept into his violin as he played?

So Julian Treslove played no instrument, though every time he passed J.
P. Guivier's window he wished he did. He could, of course, have taken up
music any time he wanted to after his father died. Look at Libor who had
learnt to play the piano in his eighties.

But  then  Libor  had  someone  to  play  it  for,  no  matter  that  she  was  no

longer with him. Whereas he . . .

 

It was as he was looking at the violins, lost in these tristful reflections, that
he  was  attacked,  a  hand  seizing  him  by  his  neck  without  warning,  as  a
valuable cat out on the tiles might be grabbed by a cat snatcher. Treslove
flinched  and  dropped  his  head  into  his  shoulders,  exactly  as  a  cat  might.
Only  he  didn't  claw  or  screech  or  otherwise  put  up  a  fight.  He  knew  the
people  of  the  street  -  the  beggars,  the  homeless,  the  dispossessed.
Imaginatively, he was one of them. To him, too, the roads and pavements of
the city were things of menace.

Years before, between jobs, and in pursuit of a beautiful unshaven nose-
ringed charity worker with whom he believed he was destined to be happy -
or  unhappy:  it  didn't  matter  which,  so  long  as  it  was  destined  -  he  had

donated  his  services  to  the  homeless  and  made  representations  on  their
behalf.  He  could  hardly  argue  when  they  made  representations  for
themselves.  So  he  fell  limp  and  allowed  himself  to  be  flung  into  the
window and emptied.

Allowed?
The word dignified his own role in this. It was all over too quickly for

him to have a say in the matter. He was grabbed, thrown, eviscerated.

By a woman.
 

But that wasn't the half of it.

It was what - reliving the event in the moments afterwards - he believed
she had said to him. He could easily have been wrong. The attack had been
too sudden and too brief for him to know what words had been exchanged,
if any. He couldn't be sure whether or not he had uttered a syllable himself.
Had he really accepted it all in silence, without even a 'Get off me!' or a
'How dare you?' or even a 'Help'? And the words he thought she had spoken
to him might have been no more than the noise of his nose breaking on the
pane  or  his  cartilages  exploding  or  his  heart  leaping  from  his  chest.
Nonetheless,  a  collection  of  jumbled  sounds  persisted  and  began  to  form
and re-form themselves in his head . . .

'Your jewels,' he fancied he'd heard her say.
A strange request, from a woman to a man, unless it had once been made
of her and she was now revisiting it upon him in a spirit of bitter, vengeful
irony. 'Your jewels - now you know how it feels to be a woman!'

Treslove had taken a module entitled Patriarchy and Politics at university.
In the course of that he often heard the sentence, 'Now you know how it
feels to be a woman.'

But what if he'd manufactured this out of some obscure masculinist guilt
and what she had actually said was 'You're Jules' - employing his mother's
fond nickname for him?

This,  too,  took  some  explaining  since  he  hardly  needed  telling  who  he

It could have been her way of marking him, letting him know that she
knew his identity - 'You're Jules and don't suppose that I will ever forget it.'
But  something  else  would  surely  have  followed  from  that.  Something
else of course did, or had, in that she comprehensively relieved him of his
valuables. Wouldn't she, though, for her satisfaction to be complete, have

was.

wanted  him  to  know  who  she  was  in  return?  'You're  Jules,  I'm  Juliette  -
remember me now, you little prick!'

The more he thought about it, the less sure he was that 'Your' or 'You're'
was quite the sound she'd made. It was more truncated. More a 'You' than a
'Your'. And more accusatory in tone. More 'You Jules' than 'You're Jules'.

'You Jules', as in 'You Jules, you!'
But what did that mean?
He had the feeling, further, that she hadn't pronounced any 's'. He strained
his restrospective hearing to catch an 's' but it eluded him. 'You Jule' was
more what she had said. Or 'You jewel'.

But is it consonant with calling someone a jewel that you smash his face

in and rob him blind?

Treslove thought not.
Which returned him to 'You Jule!'
Also inexplicable.
Unless what she had said as she was emptying his pockets was, 'You Ju!'

TWO

1

'What's your favourite colour?'

'Mozart.'
'And your star sign?'
'My eyesight?'
'Star sign. Star.'
'Oh, Jane Russell.'
So had begun Libor's first date of his widowhood.
Date! That was some joke - he ninety, she not half that, maybe not a third

of that. Date! But what other word was there?

She did not appear to recognise the name Jane Russell. Libor wondered
where the problem lay - in the accent he had not quite lost or the hearing he
had not quite kept. It was beyond his comprehension that Jane Russell could
simply be forgotten.

'R-u-s-s-e-l-l,' he spelt out. 'J-a-n-e. Beautiful, big . . .' He did the thing
men do, or used to do, weighing the fullness of a woman's breasts in front
of him, like a merchant dealing in sacks of flour.

The girl, the young woman, the child, looked away. She had no chest to
speak of herself, Libor realised, and must therefore have been affronted by
his  mercantile  gesture.  Though  if  she'd  had  a  chest  she  might  have  been
more  affronted  still.  The  things  you  had  to  remember  with  a  woman  you
hadn't been married to for half a century! The feelings you had to take into
account!

A great sadness overcame him. He wanted to be laughing with Malkie

over it. 'And then I . . .'
'Libor - you didn't!'
'I did, I did.'
He saw her put her hand to her mouth - the rings he had bought her, the
fullness of her lips, the shake of her black hair - and wanted her back or
wanted it to be over. His date, his awkwardness, his sorrow, everything.

His  date  was  called  Emily.  A  nice  name,  he  thought.  Just  a  pity  she
worked  for  the  World  Service.  In  fact,  the  World  Service  was  the  reason

friends  had  introduced  them.  Not  to  canoodle  over  the  goulash  and
dumplings - Austro-Hungarian food was his idea: old world gluttony that
would soak up any gaps in conversation - but to talk about the institution
they had in common, maybe how it had changed since Libor had been there,
maybe  to  discover  she  had  worked  with  the  children  of  whom  Libor  had
known the parents.

'Only if she's not one of those smug leftists,' Libor had said.
'Libor!'
'I can say it,' he said. 'I'm Czech. I've seen what leftists do. And they're all
smug leftists at the BBC. Especially the women. Jewish women the worst.
It's their preferred channel of apostasy. Half the girls Malkie grew up with
disappeared into the BBC. They lost their sense of the ridiculous and she
lost them.'

He could say 'Jewish women the worst', too. He was one of the allowed.
Fortunately,  Emily  wasn't  a  Jewish  leftist.  Unfortunately  she  wasn't
anything else. Except depressed. Two years before, her boyfriend Hugh had
killed himself. Thrown himself under a bus while she was waiting for him
to  collect  her.  At  the  Aldwych.  That  was  the  other  reason  friends  had
connected them - not, of course, with a view to anything romantic, but in
the hope that they would briefly cheer each other up. But of the two - Emily
and Hugh - Libor felt more of a connection to Hugh, dead under a bus.

'What bands do you like?' she asked him, after a longer dumpling-filled

silence than she could bear.

Libor pondered the question.
The girl laughed, as at her own absurdity. She twirled a lifeless lock of
hair around a finger that had an Elastoplast on it. 'What bands did you used
to like,' she corrected herself, then blushed as though she knew the second
question was more absurd than the first.

Libor  turned  his  ear  to  her  and  nodded.  'I'm  not  in  principle  keen  on

banning anything,' he said.

She stared at him.
Oh,  God,  he  remembered  in  time,  she  will  want  me  to  be  against  fox
hunting and runways and animal experiments and electric light bulbs. But
there was no point starting out - not that they were going anywhere - with a
lie.

'Four-wheel drives,' he said. 'Dropped aitches - mine are cultural - talk
radio, socialism, trainers, Russia, but definitely not fur coats. If you'd seen

Malkie in her chinchilla . . .'

She went on staring at him. He feared she was going to cry.
'No, bands,' she said at last. 'Bands.'
Deciding  against  saying  the  Czech  Philharmonic,  Libor  sighed  and
showed  her  his  hands.  The  flesh,  disfigured  with  liver  spots,  was  loose
enough for her to slide her fingers under. It would peel clean away, like the
skin on a lightly roasted chicken. His knuckles were swollen, his fingernails
yellow and bent over at the ends.

Then he ran his hands over his baldness and inclined his head. He had
always been a balding man. Balding had suited him. But he was plucked
clean by time now. The patina of extreme old age was on him. He wanted
her to see her own reflection in his pate, measure all the time she had left in
the dull mirror of his antiquity.

He could tell she couldn't figure out what he was showing her. When he

presented his bald head to Malkie she would polish it with her sleeve.

It used to excite her. Not just the head but the act of polishing it.
They had furnished their apartment in the style of Biedermeier. Libor's
taste not Malkie's (though Malkie had Biedermeier blood in her veins), but
she had humoured the aspiring European petit bourgeois in him. 'Reminds
me of our escritoire,' she would tell him. 'It responds in the same way to a
good buffing.'

It amused him to be her furniture. 'You can open my drawers whenever
you like,' he would say. And she would laugh and cuff him with her sleeve.
At the end they had talked dirty to each other. It was their defence against
pathos.

'I'm sorry,' he told the girl, folding his napkin. 'This isn't fair to you.'
He  signalled  to  the  waiter  before  remembering  his  manners.  'You  don't
want a dessert do you, Emily?' he asked. He was pleased he could recall her
name.

She shook her head.
He paid the bill.
She was as relieved as he was when they parted.

2

'I could use the company but I can't go through the pain of getting it,' he
told Treslove on the phone.

Not that Libor was the one who needed protecting. Treslove marvelled at
his courage - dressing himself up, going out on a date, making small talk.
He  pictured  him  in  his  David  Niven  outfit,  fine  white  polo  neck  jumper
worn under a blue blazer with faux military buttons. Most men Libor's age
wore lovat jackets, the colour of sick, and trousers that were too short for
them. This had always bemused and worried Treslove. At a certain age men
began  to  shrink,  and  yet  it  was  precisely  at  that  age  that  their  trousers
became too short for them. Explain that.

But not Libor. Or at least not Libor when he was got up to meet a friend,
or a woman. He was still the Mittel European dandy. Only on the telephone
did he sound his age. It was as though the telephone filtered out everything
that wasn't of the voice alone - the comedy, the bravado, the dancing hands.
An  old  torn  tissue-paper  larynx  was  all  that  was  left.  Treslove  knew  to
picture Libor in the flesh when he spoke to him on the phone, spruce in his
polo  neck,  but  the  sound  still  depressed  him.  He  heard  a  dead  man
speaking.

'I bet it wasn't as painful as you're pretending,' he said.
'You weren't there. On top of that it wasn't decent.'
'Why, what did you do?'
'I mean proper.'
'Why, what did you do?'
'I mean it was wrong of me to agree to meet her. I was there under false
pretences. I don't want to be with another woman. I can't look at another
woman without making the comparison.'

It was a week after they had dined together. Treslove hadn't told Libor
about  the  attack.  Why  worry  him?  Why  make  Libor  afraid  of  his  own
neighbourhood?

When Malkie was alive Libor carried her photograph in his wallet. Now
that she was gone, he had her on his mobile phone. While he rarely used his
phone as a phone - he found it hard to read the keyboard - he consulted her
image a hundred times a day, flipping and unflipping the lid in the middle
of a conversation. A ghost that never left him, gifted by technology. Gifted
by Finkler, to be precise, since he was the one who had set it up for him.

Libor had showed the screen to Treslove, Malkie not as she was at the
end  of  her  life,  but  as  she  had  looked  at  the  beginning  of  her  time  with
Libor.  Her  eyes  smiling  and  wicked,  appreciative,  adoring,  and  slightly

blurred,  as  though  seen  through  a  mist  -  unless  that  was  a  mist  clouding
Treslove's vision.

Treslove imagined Libor opening his phone and looking at Malkie under

the table, even as his date asked him his star sign and his favourite band.

'I bet the girl had a ball with you,' Treslove said.
'Trust me, she didn't. I have sent her flowers to apologise.'
'Libor, that will just make her think you want to go on.'
'Ech, you English! You see a flower and you think you've been proposed

to. Trust me, she won't. I enclosed a handwritten note.'

'You weren't rude to her.'
'Of course not. I just wanted her to see how shaky my handwriting was.'
'She may have taken that as proof she excited you.'
'She won't have. I told her I was impotent.'
'Did you have to be so personal?'
'That  was  to  stop  it  being  personal.  I  didn't  say  she  had  made  me

impotent.'

Treslove  was  embarrassed  by  potency  talk.  And  not  just  because  he'd
recently  been  divested  of  his  manliness  by  a  woman.  He  had  not  been
brought up, as Finkler men evidently were, to discuss matters of a sexual
nature with someone with whom he was not having sex.

'Anyway -' he said.
But Libor didn't detect his embarrassment. 'I am not in fact impotent,' he
went on, 'though I'm reminded of a time when I was. It was Malkie's doing.
Did I ever tell you she met Horowitz?'

Treslove wondered what was coming. 'You didn't,' he said tentatively, not

wanting to be thought to be leading Libor on.

'Well, she did. Twice in fact. Once in London and once in New York. At
Carnegie Hall. He invited her backstage. "Maestro", she called him. "Thank
you,  Maestro,"  she  said  and  he  kissed  her  hand.  His  own  hands,  she  told
me, were icy cold. I've always been jealous of that.'

'His icy hands?'
'No, her calling him Maestro. Do you think that's strange?'
Treslove thought about it. 'No,' he said. 'I don't. A man doesn't want the

woman he loves calling other men Maestro.'

'But why not? He was a maestro. It's funny. I wasn't in competition with
him. I'm no maestro. But for three months after I couldn't do it. Couldn't get
it up. Couldn't rise to the challenge.'

'Yes, that is funny,' Treslove said.
Sometimes even a Finkler as reverend and aged as Libor could make him

feel like a Benedictine monk.

'The power of words,' Libor went on. 'Maestro - she calls him Maestro
and I might as well not have a pecker. But listen, do you want to go out
somewhere to eat tonight?'

Twice  in  one  week!  It  wasn't  that  long  ago  that  they  hadn't  seen  each
other twice in a year. And even now that widowerhood had rebonded them
they were not seeing each other twice in a month. Were things as bad as that
for Libor?

'I can't,' Treslove said. He was unable to tell his friend the truth: that the
reason he couldn't come out was that he had a black eye, maybe a broken
nose and was still unsteady on his legs. 'I have things I must do.'
'What things?' Nearing ninety, you could ask such questions.
'Things, Libor.'
'I know you. You never say "things" if you really have things to do. You

always name them. Something's the matter.'

'You're right, I don't have things to do. And that's what's the matter.'
'Then let's go eat.'
'Can't face it, Libor. Sorry. I need to be alone.'
The  reference  was  to  the  title  of  Libor's  most  famous  show-business
book. An unofficial biography of Greta Garbo with whom Libor was once
rumoured to have had an affair.

'With Garbo?' Libor exclaimed when Treslove once asked him whether it
was true. 'Impossible. She was gone sixty when I met her. And she looked
German.'

'So?'
'So sixty was too old for me. Sixty is still too old for me.'
'That's not what I was querying. I was querying her looking German.'
'Julian, I stared deep into her eyes. As I'm staring into yours now. Trust
me - they were the eyes of a Teuton. It was like looking into the wastes of
the frozen North.'

'Libor, you come from a cold place yourself.'
'Prague is hot. Only the pavements and the Vltava are cold.'
'Even so, I don't see why that should have been a problem. Come on -

Greta Garbo!'

'Only a problem had I been contemplating an affair with her. Or she with

'You  absolutely  could  not  contemplate  having  an  affair  with  someone

me.'

who looked German?'

'I could contemplate it. I couldn't do it.'
'Not even Marlene Dietrich?'
'Especially not her.'
'Why not?'
Libor  had  hesitated,  scrutinising  his  old  pupil's  face.  'Some  things  you

don't do,' he said. 'And besides, I was in love with Malkie.'

Treslove had made a mental note. Some things you don't do. Would he
ever  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  things  Finklers  did  and  didn't  do?  Such
conversational indelicacy one moment, such scrupulousness as to the ethno-
erotic niceties the next.

Over the phone, this time, Libor ignored the allusion. 'One day you will

regret needing to be alone, Julian, when you have no choice.'

'I regret it now.'
'Then come out and play. It's you or someone who wants to know my star

sign.'

man.

3

'Libor, I want to know your star sign. Just not tonight.'
He felt guilty. You don't refuse the desperation of a lonely impotent old

But he had his own impotence to nurse.

Finkler, who did not dream, had a dream.

He dreamed that he was punching his father in the stomach.
His  mother  screamed  for  him  to  stop.  But  his  father  only  laughed  and

'Los the boy allein,' he told his wife. Which was cod Yiddish for 'Leave

shouted, 'Harder!'

the boy alone'.

In life, when his father spoke to him in cod Yiddish, Finkler turned his
back  on  him.  Why  his  father,  English  university-educated  and  normally
softly  spoken  -  a  man  of  learning  and  unshakeable  religious  conviction  -
had  to  make  this  spectacle  of  himself  in  his  shop,  throwing  his  hands
around and yelling in a peasant tongue, Finkler couldn't understand. Other

people loved his father for these shows of Jewish excitability, but Finkler
didn't. He had to walk away.

But in the dream he didn't walk away. In the dream he summoned all his

strength and threw punch after punch into his father's stomach.

What woke him was his father's stomach opening. When Finkler saw the
cancer  swimming  towards  him  in  a  sea  of  blood  he  could  not  go  on
dreaming.

He,  too,  was  surprised  when  Libor  rang.  Like  Treslove,  he  found  it
upsetting that Libor needed company twice in the same week. But he was
able  to  be  more  accommodating  than  his  friend.  Perhaps  because  he  too
needed company twice in the same week.

'Come over,' he said. 'I'll order in Chinese.'
'You speak Chinese now?'
'Funny guy, Libor. Be here at eight.'
'You sure you're up for it?'
'I'm  a  philosopher,  I'm  not  sure  about  anything.  But  come.  Just  don't

bring the Sanhedrin with you.'

The  Sanhedrin  were  the  judges  of  the  ancient  land  of  Israel.  Finkler

wasn't in the mood for Israyel talk. Not with Libor.

'Not a word, I promise,' Libor said. 'On condition that none of your Nazi
friends  will  be  there  to  steal  my  chicken  in  black  bean  sauce.  You  will
remember that I like chicken in black bean sauce?'

'I don't have Nazi friends, Libor.'
'Whatever you call them.'
Finkler  sighed.  'There'll  be  just  the  two  of  us.  Come  at  eight.  I'll  have

 

chicken with cashew nuts.'

'Black bean sauce.'
'Whatever.'
He set two places, antique horn chopsticks for each of them. One of his

last gifts to his wife, hitherto unused. It was risky but he risked it.

'These are beautiful,' Libor noted with tenderness, widower to widower.
'It's either part with them, which I can't bear to do, or use them. There's
no point in making a mausoleum of unused things. Tyler would have said
use them.'

'Harder to do with dresses,' Libor said.
Finkler laughed a laughless laugh.

'What is it about a dress a woman never got to wear?' Libor asked. 'You'd
think it would be those that carry the memory of her shape and warmth, that
still  have  her  perfume  on  them,  that  you  couldn't  bear  to  touch.  But  the
unworn ones are harder.'

'Well,  isn't  it  obvious?'  Finkler  said.  'When  you  look  at  a  dress  Malkie

never wore you see her alive and unworn in it herself.'

Libor appeared unconvinced. 'That feels too backward-looking to me.'
'We're allowed to look back.'
'Oh, I know that. I do nothing else. Since Malkie went I feel as though
my head has been put on backwards. It's your explanation of the sadness of
unused  things  I  find  too  backward-looking.  When  I  see  an  unworn  dress,
and Malkie had so many - saving them up for special occasions that never
came, some with their labels still on as though she might yet take them back
to the store - I see the future time that was stolen from her. I look forwards
into the life she didn't have, the Malkie she didn't get to be, not the Malkie
she was.'

Finkler listened. Malkie was eighty when she died. How much more life
could Libor imagine for her? Tyler never made it to fifty. So why couldn't
he feel what Libor felt? Though convinced he was gifted with an unenvious
nature - what, when all was said and done, did he have to envy? - he was
envious nonetheless, not of the longer life Malkie enjoyed, but of Libor's
range of grief. He could not, as Libor did, throw his sorrow into the future.
He did not miss the Tyler who never got to be, only the Tyler who was.

He measured his husbandly worth against the older man's. With mirth, it's
true,  but  also  meaning  it,  Libor  had  always  claimed  to  be  the  perfect
husband,  refusing  the  bed  of  some  of  the  most  beautiful  women  in
Hollywood. 'Not because I'm handsome did they want me, you understand,
but because I made them laugh. The more beautiful the woman, the more
she needs to laugh. That's why Jewish guys have always done so well. But
for  me  they  were  easy  to  resist.  Because  I  had  Malkie  who  was  more
beautiful than all of them. And who made me laugh.'

Who knew the truth of it?
Libor told how Marilyn Monroe, desperate for laughter but notoriously
confused by international time zones - in Libor's stories all beautiful women
never knew what time it was - would ring him in the dead of night. Malkie
always took the phone. It was on her side of the bed. 'Marilyn for you,' she

would say in a bored, sleepy voice, waking her husband. Fucking Marilyn
again.

She never doubted his fidelity because she was so secure in it. So did that
fidelity  -  a  fidelity  with  no  pains  or  deprivations  in  it,  Libor  insisted,  a
fidelity filled to the brim with sensual delight - explain Libor's exemption
from remorse? Guilt had become Finkler's medium when he thought about
his wife, and guilt existed only in the past. Guilt-free, assuming he told the
truth, Libor was able to sorrow over the future he and Malkie, though aged,
didn't have. At any age there is future one doesn't have. Never enough life
when you are happy, that was the thing. Never so much bliss that you can't
take a little more. Sadness for sadness, Finkler did not know which was the
more estimable, if sadness can be esteemed - feeling cheated of more of the
happiness  you'd  enjoyed,  or  never  having  had  it  in  the  first  place.  But  it
looked better to be Libor.

And that, maybe, because it was better to have been married to Malkie.
Finkler  tried  to  dismiss  this  thought  but  could  not:  it  takes  two  to  create
fidelity, and while he wouldn't go so far as to say Tyler was not worthy of
his, she certainly hadn't made it easy. Was this why he didn't feel robbed of
a  future  life  with  Tyler?  Because  he  couldn't  be  sure  he  had  one  to  look
forward to? And whose fault was that?

'Do you ever wonder,' he mused as they ate, 'whether you're doing it all

right?'

'Grieving?'
'No. Well, yes, but not just grieving. Everything. Do you ever wake in the
morning and ask yourself if you've lived the best life you could have lived?
Not  morally.  Or  not  only  morally.  Just  squeezed  the  most  out  of  your
opportunities.'

'I'm surprised to hear that question from you, of all people,' Libor said. 'I
remember  you  as  a  bright  pupil,  right  enough.  But  there  are  many  bright
pupils and I would never have guessed you would achieve what you have.'

'You're telling me I have made a little go a long way.'
'Not at all, not at all. But to my eye you have fulfilled yourself more than

most men. You're a household name -'

Finkler, pleased, waved the compliment away. Who cared about being a
household name? The flush of satisfaction in his cheeks was probably not
satisfaction  at  all,  just  embarrassment.  Household name  -  for  God's  sake.
Household name! How many households, he wondered, were naming him

Finkler did as he was told and thought about it. The two spots of colour
in his cheeks, previously the size of ten-pence pieces, grew into two blazing
suns.

'Yes, Julian. But then he has always been in waiting, hasn't he? I never
waited for anything. I took. I had the Jewish thing. Like you. I had to make
it quick, while there was time. But that only means that what I am capable
of doing I have done, whereas Julian, well, his time might yet come.'

'And does that scare you?'
'Scare me how?'
'Scare  you  to  think  he  might  overhaul  you  in  the  end.  You  were  close
friends, after all. Close friends don't get over their dread of being beaten in
the final straight. It's never over till it's over with a friend.'

'Who are you afraid might overtake you, Libor?'
'Ah, with me it really is over. My rivals are all long dead.'
'Well, Julian's not exactly breathing down my neck, is he?'
Libor  surveyed  him  narrowly,  like  an  old  red-eyed  crow  watching

something easy to get its beak into.

there are other yardsticks of success.'

'He's not now likely to make it as a household name, you mean? No. But

this very moment? How many households did it take to make a household
name?

'Only  think  of  Julian,'  Libor  continued,  'and  how  disappointing  his  life

must appear to him.'

'God,  I  don't  doubt  that.'  He  paused  to  ponder  Libor's  words.  Other

yardsticks, other yardsticks . . . But couldn't think of any.

Libor wondered if he'd gone too far. He remembered how touchy he had
been about success at Finkler's age. He decided to change the subject, re-
examining  the  chopsticks  Finkler  had  bought  his  wife.  'These  really  are
lovely,' he said.

'She  talked  about  collecting  them,  but  never  did.  She  often  discussed
collecting  things  but  never  got  round  to  it.  What's  the  point?  she'd  ask.  I
took that as a personal affront. That our life together wasn't worth collecting
for. Could she have known what was going to happen to her, do you think?
Did she want it to happen to her?'

Libor looked away. He was suddenly sorry he had come. He couldn't take
another man's wife-sorrows on top of his own. 'We can't know those things,'
he said. 'We can know only what we feel. And since we're the ones who are

left, only our feelings matter. Better we discuss Isrrrrae.' He put a fourth 'r'
in the word to irritate his friend out of pathos.

'Libor, you promised.'
'Anti-Semites, then. Did I make a promise not to discuss your friends the

anti-Semites?'

'There you are then.'
'It's not peculiar to Jews to dislike what some Jews do.'
'No, but it's peculiar to Jews to be ashamed of it. It's our shtick. Nobody
does  it  better.  We  know  the  weak  spots.  We've  been  doing  it  so  long  we

The comedic Jewish intonation was meant as a further irritant to Finkler.
Libor  knew  that  Finkler  hated  Jewishisms.  Mauscheln,  he  called  it,  the
hated secret language of the Jews, the Yiddishising that drove German Jews
mad in the days when they thought the Germans would love them the more
for playing down their Jewishness. The lost provincial over-expressiveness
of his father.

'I don't have friends who are anti-Semites,' Finkler said.
Libor  screwed  up  his  face  until  he  resembled  a  medieval  devil.  All  he

lacked were the horns. 'Yes, you do. The Jewish ones.'

'Oh, here we go, here we go. Any Jew who isn't your kind of Jew is an
anti-Semite. It's a nonsense, Libor, to talk of Jewish anti-Semites. It's more
than a nonsense, it's a wickedness.'

'Don't  get  kochedik  with  me  for  speaking  the  truth.  How  can  it  be  a

nonsense when we invented anti-Semitism?'

'I know how this goes, Libor. Out of our own self-hatred . . .'
'You think there's no such thing? What do you say to St Paul, itching with
a  Jewishness  he  couldn't  scratch  away  until  he'd  turned  half  the  world
against it?'

'I say thank you, Paul, for widening the argument.'
'You call that widening? Strait is the gate, remember.'
'That's Jesus, not Paul.'
'That's  Jesus  as  reported  by  Jews  already  systematically  Paulised.  He
couldn't take us on in the flesh so he extolled the spirit. You're doing the
same  in  your  own  way.  You're  ashamed  of  your  Jewish  flesh.  Have
rachmones  on  yourself.  Just  because  you're  a  Jew  doesn't  mean  you're  a
monster.'

'I  don't  think  I'm  a  monster.  I  don't  even  think  you're  a  monster.  I'm

ashamed of Jewish, no, Israyeli actions-'

know exactly where to stick the sword.'
'You admit then there are weak spots?'
And they were away.
 

After Libor left, Finkler went into the bedroom and opened his late wife's
wardrobe. He had not removed her clothes. There they hung, rail after rail
of  them,  the  narrative  of  their  life  together,  her  lean  and  hungry  social
sharpness,  his  pride  in  her  appearance,  the  heads  that  turned  when  they
entered a room, she like a weapon at his side.

He tried for sadness. Was there something she hadn't worn, that would
break his heart for the life she had not lived? He couldn't find a thing. When
Tyler  bought  a  dress  she  wore  it.  Everything  was  for  now.  If  she  bought
three  dresses  in  a  day  she  contrived  to  wear  three  dresses  in  a  day.  To
garden in, if she had to. What was there to wait for?

He breathed in her aroma, then closed the wardrobe doors, lay down on

her side of the bed and wept.

But the tears were not as he wanted them to be. They were not Libor's

tears. He couldn't forget himself in them.

After ten minutes he rose, went to his computer and logged on to online
poker. In poker he could do what he couldn't do in grief - he could forget
himself.

In winning he could forget himself even more.

4

In Treslove's dream a young girl is running towards him. She bends, in her
running, barely slowing down, to take off her shoes. She is a schoolgirl in
school uniform, a pleated skirt, a white blouse, a blue jumper, an untied tie.
Her shoes impede her. She bends in her running to take them off so that she
can run faster, freer, in her grey school socks.

It is an analytic dream. In it, Treslove questions its meaning. The dream's
meaning and the reason he is dreaming it, but also the meaning of the thing
itself. Why does the girl affect him as she does? Is it the girl's vulnerability,
or  the  very  opposite,  her  strength  and  resolution?  Does  he  worry  for  her
feet, shoeless on the hard pavement? Is he curious about the reason for her
hurry?  Jealous  perhaps  because  she  is  heedless  of  him  and  running  to
someone else? Does he want to be the object of her hurry?

was deep enough for him to have dreamed it twice.

 

He has dreamed this dream all his life and no longer knows if it has its
origins in something he once saw. But it is as real to him as reality and he
welcomes its recurrence, though he does not summon it before he goes to
sleep  and  does  not  always  remember  it  with  clarity  when  he  wakes.  The
debate  as  to  its  status  takes  place  entirely  within  the  dream.  Sometimes,
though,  when  he  sees  a  schoolgirl  running,  or  bending  to  tie  or  untie  a
shoelace, he has a dim recollection of knowing her from somewhere else.

It is possible he dreamed this dream the night he was mugged. His sleep

He  was  a  man  who  ordinarily  woke  to  a  sense  of  loss.  He  could  not
remember  a  single  morning  of  his  life  when  he  had  woken  to  a  sense  of
possession. When there was nothing palpable he could reproach himself for
having lost, he found the futility he needed in world affairs or sport. A plane
had  crashed  -  it  didn't  matter  where.  An  eminent  and  worthy  person  had
been  disgraced  -  it  didn't  matter  how.  The  English  cricket  team  had  been
trounced - it didn't matter by whom. Since he didn't follow or give a fig for
sport,  it  was  nothing  short  of  extraordinary  that  his  abiding  sense  of
underachievement  should  have  found  a  way  to  associate  itself  with  the
national cricket team's. He did the same with tennis, with footballers, with
boxers, with snooker players even. When a fly and twitchy south Londoner
called  Jimmy  White  went  into  the  final  session  of  the  World  Snooker
Championship seven frames ahead with eight to play and still managed to
end  the  night  a  loser,  Treslove  retired  to  his  bed  a  beaten  man  and  woke
broken-hearted.  Did  he  care  about  snooker?  No.  Did  he  admire  Jimmy
White and want him to win? No. Yet in White's humiliating capitulation to
the  gods  of  failure  Treslove  was  somehow  able  to  locate  his  own.  Not
impossibly, White himself passed the day following his immeasurable loss
laughing and joking with friends, buying everyone he knew drinks, in far
better spirits than Treslove did.

Strange,  then,  that  the  morning  after  his  humiliating  mugging  Treslove
had woken to an alien sensation of near-cheerfulness. Was this what had all
along  been  missing  from  his  life  -  a  palpable  loss  to  justify  his  hitherto
groundless sensation of it, the theft of actual possessions as opposed to the
constantly  nagging  consciousness  of  something  having  gone  missing?  An
objective  correlative,  as  T.  S.  Eliot  called  it  in  a  stupid  essay  on  Hamlet
(Treslove had earned a B-upgraded to an A++ for his essay on T. S. Eliot's),

as though all Hamlet had ever needed to explain his feeling like a rogue and
peasant slave was someone to divest him of his valuables.

He and Finkler had quoted Hamlet endlessly to each other at school. It
was the only work of literature they had both liked at the same time. Finkler
was  not  a  literary  man.  Literature  was  insufficiently  susceptible  to
rationality  for  his  taste.  And  lacked  practical  application.  But  Hamlet
worked for him. Not knowing that Finkler wanted to kill his father, Treslove
hadn't understood why. He liked it himself, not because he wanted to kill his
mother,  but  on  account  of  Ophelia,  the  patron  saint  of  watery  women.
Whatever  their  separate  motivation,  they  entwined  the  play  around  their
friendship.  'There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  Samuel,  than  are
dreamt of in your philosophy,' Treslove used to say when Finkler wouldn't
go to a party with him because he didn't believe in getting pissed. 'Come on,
it'll be a laugh.' But Finkler, of course, was bound to tell him that he had of
late, wherefore he knew not, lost all his mirth.

After which he usually changed his mind and went to the party.
Speaking  for  himself,  all  these  years  later,  Treslove  wasn't  sure  he  had
any native mirth to regain. He hadn't been amused for a long time. And he
wasn't exactly amused now. But without doubt he felt more purposeful this
minute than he had in years. How this could be, he didn't know. He would
have expected himself to want to stay in bed and never rise again. Mugged
by  a  woman!  For  a  man  whose  life  had  been  one  absurd  disgrace  after
another, this surely was the crowning ignominy. And yet it wasn't.

And  this  despite  the  unpleasant  physical  after-effects  of  the  attack.  His
knees  and  elbows  smarted.  There  was  nasty  bruising  around  his  eyes.  It
pained him to breathe through his nostrils. But there was air out there and
he was eager to breathe it.

He got up and opened his curtains and then closed them again. There was
nothing to see. He lived in a small flat in an area of London which people
who couldn't afford to live in Hampstead called Hampstead, but as it wasn't
Hampstead  he  had  no  view  of  the  Heath.  Finkler  had  Heath.  Heath  from
every window. He - Finkler - had not the slightest interest in Heath but he
had bought a house with a view of it from every window, just because he
could. Treslove checked this near re-descent into consciousness of loss. A
view of the Heath wasn't everything. Tyler Finkler had enjoyed a different
view of the Heath from every window and what good had any of them done
her?

During breakfast there was a light nosebleed. He normally liked to take
an early walk to the shops but he couldn't risk being seen by someone he
knew.  Nosebleeding  -  like  grief,  as  Treslove  recalled  Libor  saying  -  is
something you do in the privacy of your own home.

He remembered what, in his humiliation and exhaustion, he had forgotten
the night before - to cancel his credit cards and report his mobile phone lost.
If  the  woman  who  had  robbed  him  had  been  on  his  phone  all  night  to
Buenos Aires, or had flown to Buenos Aries on one of his cards and been
on  the  phone  all  morning  from  there  to  London,  he  would  already  be
insolvent.  But  strangely,  nothing  had  been  spent.  Perhaps  she  was  still
deciding where to go. Unless theft was not her motive.

Had she wanted simply to complicate his life she couldn't have chosen a
more  efficient  method.  He  was  on  his  house  phone  for  the  rest  of  the
morning, waiting for real people who spoke a language he could understand
to  answer,  having  to  prove  he  was  who  he  said  he  was  though  why  he
would have been worrying about the loss of his cards if he wasn't who he
said  he  was  he  didn't  know.  The  loss  of  his  mobile  was  more  serious;  it
seemed he would have to have a new number just when he had finally got
round to memorising the old one. Or maybe not. It depended on the plan he
was on. He hadn't known he was on a plan.

Yet not once did he turn tetchy or ask to speak to a supervisor. If further
proof  was  needed  that  actual  as  opposed  to  imaginary  loss  had  done
wonders for his temper, this was it. Not once did he ask for someone's name
or threaten to get them sacked. Not once did he mention the ombudsman.

There  was  no  mail  for  him.  Though  he  had  the  emotional  strength  to
open envelopes, as was not always the case with him in the morning, there
was  relief  in  there  being  nothing  to  open  today.  No  mail  meant  no
engagements,  for  he  accepted  engagements  by  no  other  means,  no  matter
that they came directly from his agents. Agree by phone to show up God
knows where looking like God knows whom and there was a fair chance it
would be a wild goose chase. Only actual mail meant actual business. And
about actual business he was conscientiously professional, never refusing a
gig on the superstitious assumption that the first gig he refused would be his
last. There were plenty of lookalikes out there clamouring for work. London
was  choked  with  other  people's  doubles.  Everyone  looked  like  someone
else. Fall out of sight and you'd soon be out of mind. As at the BBC. But

he'd have had to refuse today given how he looked. Unless he was asked to
turn up to someone's party as Robert De Niro in Raging Bull.

Besides, he had things he needed some mental space to think about. Such
as  why  he  had  been  attacked.  Not  only  to  what  end,  if  neither  his  credit
cards  nor  his  mobile  phone  had  been  used,  but  why  him?  There  was  an
existential form this question could take: Why me, O Lord? And there was
a practical one: Why me rather than somebody else?

Was it because he looked an easy victim? An inadequately put-together
man with a modular degree who was sure to offer no resistance? A nobody
in particular who just happened to be at the window of J. P. Guivier when
the woman - deranged, drunk or drugged - just happened to be passing? A
lookalike for a man against whom she had a grievance, whoever she was?

Or did she know him for himself and wreak a vengeance she had long

been planning? Was there a woman out there who hated him that much?

Mentally,  he  went  through  the  list.  The  disappointees,  the  wronged  (he
didn't know how he had wronged them, only that they looked and felt and
sounded wronged), the upset, the insulted, the abused (he didn't know how
he had abused them etc.), the discontented, the never satisfied or appeased,
the unhappy. But then they had all been unhappy. Unhappy when he found
them  and  unhappier  when  they  left.  So  many  unhappy  women  out  there.
Such a sea of female misery.

But none of it his doing, for Christ's sake.
Had he ever raised a hand to a woman to explain why a woman should

want to raise a hand to him? No. Not ever.

Well, once . . . nearly.
 

The fly incident.

They'd been away for a long romantic weekend, he and Joia - Joia whose
voice  had  the  quality  of  organza  tearing  and  whose  nervous  system  was
visible through her skin, a tracery of fine blue lines like rivers on an atlas -
three  fretful  days  in  Paris  during  which  they  hadn't  been  able  to  find  a
single place to eat. In Paris! They'd passed and looked into restaurants, of
course, on some occasions even taken a seat, but whichever he fancied, she
didn't  -  on  nutritional  or  dietetic  or  humanitarian  or  simply  feel-wrong
grounds - and whichever she did, he didn't, either because he couldn't afford
it or the waiter had insulted him or the menu made greater demands of his
French  than  he  could  bear  Joia  -  Hoia  -  to  witness.  For  three  days  they

walked  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  greatest  eating  city  on  earth,
squabbling,  ashamed  and  famished,  and  then  when  they  returned  to
Treslove's flat in sullen silence they found upwards of ten thousand flies in
their death throes - mouchoirs, no, mouches: how come he remembered that
word alone of all the French he knew; what a pity mouches had not been on
a single menu - a mass suicide of flies in its final stages, flies dying on the
bed, on the windows and the windowsills, in the dressing-table drawers, in
Joia's  shoes  even.  She  had  screamed  in  horror.  It  was  possible  he  had
screamed in horror too. But if he did, he stopped. And Joia, whose organza
screams would have harrowed hell, did not. Treslove had seen enough films
in which a man slapped a hysterical woman to bring her to her senses to
know that that was how you brought a hysterical woman to her senses. But
he only made as if to slap her.

The making as if to slap her - the frozen gesture of a slap - was as bad,
though,  as  if  he'd  slapped  her  in  earnest,  and  maybe  even  worse  since  it
signalled intentionality rather than temporary loss of sanity of which hunger
was a contributory cause.

He didn't deny, to himself at least, that the sight of all those flies dying
like  .  .  .  well,  like  flies  -  tombant  commes  des  mouches  -  had  a  no  less
deranging effect on him than it had on Joia, and that his almost-slap was as
much to calm his nerves as hers. But it is expected of a man to know what
to  do  when  the  unforeseen  happens,  and  his  not  knowing  what  to  do
counted as much against him as the almost-slap.

'Hit the flies if you must hit someone,' Joia cried, her voice quavering as
though on a high wire of silk, 'but don't you ever, ever, ever, ever think of
hitting me.'

For  a  moment  it  occurred  to  Treslove  that  there  were  more  evers

multiplying in his bedroom than there were flies dying.

He closed his eyes against the pain and when he opened them Joia was
gone. He shut the door of his bedroom and went to sleep on his couch. The
following day the flies were dead. Not a one twitched. He swept them up
and filled the bin with them. No sooner had he finished than Joia's brother
came around to collect her things. 'But not the shoes with the flies in,' he
told Treslove, as though Treslove was a man who out of malice put flies in
women's shoes. 'Those my sister says you can keep to remember her by.'

Treslove  remembered  her  all  right,  and  knew  it  was  not  she  who  had
attacked him. Joia's bones could not have carried the weight of his assailant.

Nor  could  her  voice  have  ever  dropped  so  low.  Besides,  he  would  have
known if she was in the vicinity. He would have heard her nerves twanging
blocks away.

And the contact would have destroyed his mind.
 

Then there was the face-painting incident.

 

Treslove  remembered  it  only  to  forget  it.  He  might  have  woken  to  an
alien sensation of near-cheerfulness, but he wasn't up to recalling the face-
painting incident.

After four days of lying around in a fair bit of pain he rang his doctor. He
had a private doctor - one of the perks of his having no wife or similar to
put a strain on his finances - which meant he was able to get an appointment
that afternoon instead of the following month by which time the pain would
have  subsided  or  he  would  be  dead.  He  wound  a  scarf  around  his  throat,
pulled his trilby down over his eyes, and scurried down the lane. Twenty
years before he had been a patient of Dr Gerald Lattimore's father, Charles
Lattimore,  who  had  keeled  over  in  his  surgery  just  minutes  after  seeing
Treslove.  And  more  than  twenty  years  before  that  Dr  Gerald  Lattimore's
grandfather,  Dr  James  Lattimore,  had  been  killed  in  a  car  crash  while
returning  from  delivering  Treslove.  Whenever  Treslove  visited  Dr  Gerald
Lattimore he remembered Dr Charles Lattimore's and Dr James Lattimore's
deaths and imagined that Gerald Lattimore must remember them, too.

Does  he  blame  me?  Treslove  wondered.  Or  worse,  does  he  dread  my
visits in case the same thing happens to him? Doctors read the genes the
way fortune-tellers read the tea leaves; they believe in rational coincidence.
Whatever  Dr  Gerald  Lattimore  dreaded  or  remembered,  he  always

handled Treslove more roughly than Treslove believed was necessary,

'How painful is that?' he asked pinching Treslove's nose.
'Bloody painful.'
'I still think nothing's broken. Take some paracetamol. What did you do?'
'Walked into a tree.'
'You'd be surprised how many of my patients walk into trees.'
'I'm not in the slightest bit surprised. Hampstead's full of trees.'
'This isn't Hampstead.'
'And we're all preoccupied these days. We don't have the mental space to

notice where we're going.'

'What's preoccupying you?'
'Everything. Life. Loss. Happiness.'
'Do you want to see someone about it?'
'I'm seeing you.'
'Happiness isn't my field. You depressed?'
'Strangely  not.'  Treslove  looked  up  at  Lattimore's  ceiling  fan,  a  rickety
contraption with thin blades which rattled and wheezed as it slowly turned.
One day that's going to come off and hit a patient, Treslove thought. Or a
doctor.  'God  is  good  to  me,'  he  said,  as  though  that  was  who  he'd  been
looking at in the fan, 'all things considered.'

'Take your scarf off a minute,' Lattimore said suddenly. 'Let me see your

neck.'

him.

For  a  doctor,  Lattimore  was,  much  like  his  fan,  insubtantially  put
together. Treslove remembered his father and imagined his grandfather as
men of bulk and authority. The third Dr Lattimore looked too young to have
completed his studies. His wrists were as narrow as a girl's. And the skin
between  his  fingers  pink,  as  though  the  air  had  not  got  to  him  yet.  But
Treslove still did as he was told.

'And did the tree also make those marks on your neck?' the doctor asked

'OK, a woman scratched me.'
'Those don't look like scratches.'
'OK, a woman manhandled me.'
'A woman manhandled you! What did you do to her?'
'You mean did I manhandle her back? Of course not.'
'No, what did you do to make her manhandle you?'
Culpability.
From  before  Treslove  could  remember,  first  the  first  Dr  Lattimore,  by
implication, and second the second Dr Lattimore, by looks and stern words,
had punished him with culpability. It didn't matter what ailment he turned
up  with  -  tonsillitis,  shortness  of  breath,  low  blood  pressure,  high
cholesterol  -  it  was  always  somehow  Treslove's  fault;  simply  being  born,
Treslove's fault. And now a suspected fractured nose. Also his fault.

'I am innocent of any responsibility for this,' he said, sitting down again
and hanging his head, as though to suggest a beaten dog. 'I was mugged.
Unusual,  I  know,  for  a  grown  man  to  be  beaten  up  and  then  to  have  his
pockets emptied by a woman. But I was. I'd say it's my age.' He thought

twice about what he said next but he said it anyway. 'You might not know
that your grandfather delivered me. I have been in the hands of Lattimores
from the beginning. It might be time now for a third-generation Lattimore
to recommend me sheltered accommodation.'

'I don't want to disabuse you but if you think you'll be safe in sheltered
accommodation you're mistaken. There are women there who'd rob you as
soon as look at you.'

'What about an old folks' home?'
'The same, I'm afraid.'
'Do I look that soft a target?'
Lattimore looked him up and down. The answer was clearly yes. But he
found a tactful way of putting it. 'It's not about you,' he said, 'it's about the
women.  They're  getting  stronger  by  the  day.  That's  medical  progress  for
you. I have patients in their eighties I wouldn't want to tangle with. I'd say
you're safer out in the world where at least you can run.'

'I doubt it. The word must be out by now. And they'll be able to smell the
fear on me anyway. Every woman mugger in London. Even some who have
never before given a thought to armed robbery.'

'You sound cheerful about the prospect.'
'I'm not. I'm just trying not to let it get me down.'
'Very sensible. I hope they've caught this one at least.'
'Who? The police? I didn't notify the police.'
'Don't you think you should have?'
'So that they can ask me what I did to provoke her? No. They'll accuse
me of propositioning or abusing her. Or they'll warn me against going out at
night  on  my  own.  Either  way  they'll  end  up  laughing.  It's  thought  to  be
amusing  -  a  man  copping  a  broken  nose  from  a  woman.  It's  the  stuff  of
seaside cartoons.'

'It's not broken. And I'm not laughing.'
'You are. Inside you are.'
'Well, I hope you are, inside, as well. Best medicine, you know.'
And strangely, Treslove was. Laughing inside.
But he wasn't expecting it to last.
And he wasn't convinced his nose wasn't broken.

5

There  was  something  else  Treslove  had  wanted  to  bring  up,  because  he
needed to bring it up with somebody, but in the laughter had thought better
of it. And Lattimore, he decided, wasn't the man for it either. Wrong type.
Wrong build. Wrong persuasion.

What the woman had said to him.
Treslove wasn't exactly on secure ground about this, even with himself.
Maybe he had only imagined that she had called him what she'd called him.
Maybe she had, after all, only asked him for his jewels, referring possibly,
and in a spirit of violently affronted ribaldry, to his family jewels. I'll have
your  manhood,  she  could  have  been  saying.  I'll  have  your  balls.  Which
indeed she had.

Then again, why not not just leave it at her identifying him, for her own

private satisfaction, as 'You Jules?'

Trouble was - how did she know his name? And why did she want, of all

people's balls, his balls?

None of it made any sense.
Unless she knew him. But he'd been through this. Other than Joia (and
Joia was ruled out), and Joanna whose face he'd painted (and Joanna was
ruled  out  because  Treslove  wouldn't  allow  himself  to  think  of  her),  what
woman who knew him would want to attack him? What bodily as opposed
to psychic harm had he ever done a woman?

No matter how often often he revolved it in his mind, he came out at the
same place. No to jewels, no to jewel, no to Jules, no to Jule, and yes to Ju.

You Ju . . .
A  solution  that  created  more  mysteries  than  it  cleared  up.  For  if  the
woman wasn't known to him, or he to her, what was she doing making such
a mistake as to his - he was damned if he knew what to call it - his ethnicity,
his belief system (he would have said his faith but Finkler was a Finkler and
Finkler had no faith)? His spiritual physiognomy, then.

You Ju.
Julian Treslove - a Ju?
Was  it  simply  a  case,  therefore,  of  mistaken  identity?  Could  she,  in
confusion,  have  followed  him  from  Libor's,  where  she'd  been  waiting  for
Sam Finkler, not him? He looked nothing like Sam Finkler - indeed, Sam
Finkler was one of the few people he didn't look like - but if she was simply
obeying  orders  or  carrying  out  a  contract,  she  might  not  have  been
adequately apprised of the appearance of the person she'd been hired to get.

And in the confusion he had not had the presence of mind to say, 'Me no

Ju, Finkler he Ju.'

But then who would be out to get Sam Finkler? Who other than Julian
Treslove, that is? He was a harmless, if wealthy and voluble, philosopher.
People  liked  him.  They  read  his  books.  They  watched  his  television
programmes.  He  had  sought  and  earned  their  love.  There  were  some
troubles with fellow-Finklers he gathered, especially of the sort who, like
Libor,  called  Israel  Isrrrae,  but  no  fellow  Finkler,  let  him  be  the  most
Zionistical  of  Zionists,  would  surely  attack  him  and  abuse  him  on  the
grounds of their common ancestry.

And why a woman? Unless it was a woman Finkler had hurt personally -
there  were  certainly  a  number  of  those  -  but  a  woman  Finkler  had  hurt
personally would surely know the difference between Finkler and Treslove
up close. And she had got up very close.

He  had  smelt  her  body  odour.  She  must  have  smelt  his.  And  he  and

Finkler . . . well . . .

None of it made the slightest sense.
And  here  was  something  else  that  made  not  the  slightest  sense,  except
that it made, if anything, only too much. What if the woman hadn't been
addressing him by his name - You or You're Jules . . . You Jule . . . You Ju -
but  had  been  apprising  him  of  hers  -  not  You're  or  Your  Jules,  but  Your
Juno, Your Judith, or Your June? His, in the sense that a Spanish fortune-
teller with a Halesowen accent had once promised him a Juno or a Judith or
a June. And warned him of danger into the bargain.

He didn't, of course, believe in fortune-telling. He doubted he would even
have  remembered  the  fortune-teller  had  he  not  fallen  in  love  with  her.
Treslove never forgot a woman he fell in love with. He never forgot being
made  a  fool  of  either,  not  least  as  the  one  often  followed  hard  upon  the
other.  And  then  there  was  Sam's  smart-arsed  D'Jew  know  Jewno  joke,
designed  to  show  him  that  when  it  came  to  lingusitic  virtuosity  a  non-
Finkler didn't hold a candle to a Finkler. D'Jew know Jewno was as a scar
that had never healed.

But what he remembered aside, the only way a fortune-teller could have
known the name of the woman who would mug him thirty years later was
by her being the woman who would mug him thirty years later, and what
likelihood was there of that? Nonsense, all of it. But the idea of something

foreordained can shake the soul of the most rational of men, and Treslove
was not the most rational of men.

None of it might have had meaning, but then again all of it might have
had meaning, even if it was only the meaning of extreme coincidence. She
could have been calling him You Jules or You Ju or whoever and telling him
that she was his Judith or whoever. Jules and Judith Treslove - Hules and
Hudith Treslove - why the fuck not?

Knocked  him  senseless  for  his  credit  card  and  phone  and  then  used

neither. Therefore knocked him senseless for himself.

No, none of it made the slightest sense.
But  the  conundrum  added  to  his  unexpected  (all  things  considered)
breeziness. Had he been more familiar with the state he might have gone
further and declared himself - to use the word that had pissed off the woman
who  had  fucked  him  in  her  Birkenstocks  (for  her,  too,  he  had  never
forgotten) - exhilarated.

Like a man on the edge of a discovery.
 

For the same reason that he didn't tell the police, Treslove didn't tell either
of his sons.

In their case they would not even have bothered to ask what he had done
to  provoke  the  woman.  Though  the  sons  of  different  mothers  they  were
similar in their view of him and took his provocativeness for granted. This
being  what  you  get  as  a  father  when  you  walk  out  on  your  children's
mothers.

In fact, Treslove hadn't walked out on anyone, if by 'walking out' some
callous  act  of  desertion  was  implied.  He  lacked  the  resolution,  call  it  the
independence of soul, for that. Either he drifted away, as a matter of tact -
for  Treslove  knew  when  he  wasn't  wanted  -  or  women  deserted  him,
whether on account of flies, or for another man, or simply for a life which,
however lonely, was preferable to one more hour with him.

He bored them into hating him, he knew that. Though he had promised
no  woman  an  exciting  life  when  he  met  her,  he  gave  the  impression  of
glamour and sophistication, of being unlike other men, of being deep and
curious - an arts producer, for a while, an assistant director of festivals, and
even when he was merely driving a milk float or selling shoes, artistic by
temperament - all of which combined to make women think they had been
assured  an  adventure,  of  the  mind  at  least.  In  their  disappointment,  they

took his devotion to them to be a sort of entrapment; they talked about dolls'
houses  and  women's  prisons,  they  called  him  a  jailer,  a  collector,  a
sentimental psychopath - well, maybe he was a sentimental psychopath, but
that  should  have  been  for  him  to  say,  not  them  -  a  stifler  of  dreams,  a
suffocator of hopes, a bloodsucker.

As a man who loved women to death, Treslove didn't see how he could
also be a stifler of their dreams. Prior to his leaving the BBC, Treslove had
asked  one  of  his  presenters  -  a  woman  who  dressed  in  a  red  beret  and
fishnet  stockings,  like  a  pantomime  French  spy  -  to  marry  him.  In  some
corner  of  himself  he  saw  it  as  a  favour.  Who  else  was  ever  going  to  ask
Jocelyn for her hand? But he was in love with her too. A woman's inability
to be stylish no matter how hard she tried always moved Julian Treslove.
Which meant that he was moved by most of the women he worked near in
the  BBC.  Beneath  their  painfully  frenetic  striving  to  dress  new  wave  or
challengingly out of vogue - nouvelle vague, or ancienne vogue - he saw a
grubby  slip-strap  spinsterliness  leading  into  an  interminable  old  age  and
then  into  a  cold  and  unvisited  grave.  So  'Marry  me,'  he  said,  out  of  the
kindness of his heart.

They were eating a late, late Indian meal after a late, late recording. They
were  the  only  people  in  the  restaurant,  the  chef  had  gone  home  and  the
waiter was hovering.

Perhaps the hour and the surroundings gave his proposal a desper-ation -
a  desperation  for  them  both  -  he  didn't  intend.  Perhaps  he  shouldn't  have
made it sound quite so much like a favour.

'Marry you, you old ghoul!' Jocelyn told him, laughing under her French

'In what way?' Treslove asked.
'As anything other than a friend.'

beret, her matching red lips twisted into a grimace. 'I'd die in your bed.'

'You'll die out of it,' Treslove said, hurt and enraged by the violence of
the rejection. But meaning what he said. Where else was Jocelyn going to
get a better offer?

'There  you  are,'  she  snorted,  pointing  as  at  some  ectoplasmic
manifestation  of  Treslove's  true  nature.  'That's  the  ghoulishness  I  was
talking about.'

Afterwards, on a late-night bus, she patted his hand and said she hadn't

meant to be unkind. She didn't think of him in that way, that was all.

'Well find another friend,' he told her. Which - yes, yes, he knew - only

proved her point a second time.

So where would be the sense in looking for sympathy from his sons, both
of  whom  were  the  sons  of  women  who  would  have  said  about  Treslove
exactly what Jocelyn said?

And as for bringing up any of the you Ju me Judith business, he'd have

died first.

They were in their early twenties and not marrying men themselves. Not
marrying men by temperament, that is, whatever their age. Rodolfo, Ralph
to his friends, ran a sandwich bar in the City - much in the spirit that his
father  had  driven  a  milk  float  and  replaced  sash  windows,  Treslove
surmised, and, he imagined, out of similar professional frustrations, though
with  added  gender  issues.  His  son  had  a  pigtail  and  wore  an  apron  to
prepare the fillings. It was not discussed. What was Treslove going to say -
'Stick to women, my son, and you'll have the fine time I've had'? Good luck
to  him,  he  thought.  But  he  understood  so  little  of  it  he  might  have  been
talking about a Martian. Alfredo - Alf to his friends, though his friends were
few and far between - played the piano in palm court hotels in Eastbourne,
Torquay  and  Bath.  Music  had  skipped  a  generation.  What  his  father
forbade, Treslove, from a distance, encouraged. But there was little joy for
him in Alfredo's musicality. The boy - the man now - played introvertedly,
for nobody's pleasure but his own. This made him ideally suited to playing
during afternoon tea or dinner in large dining rooms where no one wanted
to hear any music except occasionally for 'Happy Birthday to You', and not
even that in places where the diners knew how sarcastically Alfredo played
it.

Gender problems again? Treslove thought not. He had sired a man who

could take women or leave them alone, that was all. Another Martian.

And  anyway  there  was  no  history  between  them  of  Treslove  talking
about what concerned him. There were advantages in having sons he hadn't
brought up. He didn't have to blame himself for what had become of them,
for  one.  And  he  wasn't  the  first  person  they  came  to  when  they  were  in
trouble.  But  he  sometimes  missed  the  intimacy  he  imagined  real  fathers
enjoying with their sons.

Finkler,  for  example,  had  two  sons  plus  a  daughter,  all  at  one  end  or
another  of  their  university  trajectories,  campus  kids  like  their  father,  and
Treslove supposed they had got into a huddle when Tyler Finkler died and

supported one another. Perhaps Finkler had been able to cry with his boys,
maybe even cry into their necks. Treslove's own father had cried into his
neck, just once; the occasion was burnt into his brain, not fancifully, no, not
fancifully - so hot had been his father's tears, so desperate had been his grip
on  Treslove's  head,  both  hands  clawing  at  his  hair,  so  inconsolable  his
father's  grief,  so  loud  the  sorrow,  that  Treslove  thought  his  brain  would
combust.

He  wished  no  such  terrible  experience  on  his  own  sons.  There  was
nowhere to go after it for Treslove and his father. They were fused from that
moment and either had to go through what was left of their lives together
melded  in  that  fashion,  like  two  drowning  swimmers  holding  each  other
down  in  molten  grief,  or  they  had  to  look  away  and  try  not  to  share  a
moment  of  intimacy  ever  again.  Without  its  ever  being  discussed,  they
chose the latter route.

But between weeping like a broken god into your children's necks and
roughly  shaking  them  by  their  hands  as  a  stranger  might,  there  must,
Treslove thought, be intermediate territory. He hadn't found it. Rodolfo and
Alfredo were his sons, they even sometimes remembered to call him Father,
but any suggestion of intimacy terrified all three of them. There was some
taboo  on  it,  as  on  incest.  Well,  it  was  explicable  and  probably  right.  You
can't  not  bring  your  children  up  and  then  expect  them  to  give  you  their
shoulders to cry on.

He wasn't sure, either, that he wanted to confide a moment of shame and
weakness, let alone wild supposition and superstition, to them. Could it be
that  they  admired  him  -  their  remote,  handsome  father  who  could  be
mistaken for Brad Pitt and brought home money for the privilege? He didn't
know. But on the off chance that they did, he wasn't prepared to jeopardise
that admiration by telling them he'd been rolled by a woman in the middle
of town in what was, effectively, broad daylight. He didn't have much of a
grasp of family life but he guessed that a son doesn't want to hear that about
his father.

The good thing was that he only rarely spoke to them at the best of times,
so they wouldn't be attaching any significance to his silence. Whatever they
knew about family life they knew that a father was someone from whom
one rarely hears.

Instead,  after  giving  himself  time  to  mull  it  over  -  Treslove  was  not  a
precipitate  man  when  it  came  to  doing  anything  other  than  proposing

marriage - he resolved to invite Finkler out for afternoon tea, a tradition that
went back to their schooldays. Scones and jam on Haverstock Hill. Finkler
owed  him  a  show  after  failing  to  turn  up  the  last  time  they'd  arranged  a
meeting. Busy man, Finkler. Sam the man. And he owed Finkler a warning
if somebody really was out to get him, preposterous as that sounded when
he rehearsed saying it.

And besides, Finkler was a Finkler and Treslove was on Finkler business.

6

'It's possible somebody's out to get you,' he said, deciding to come right out
with it, while pouring the tea.

For  some  reason  he  always  poured  when  he  was  with  Finkler.  In  over
thirty years of taking tea together he could not remember a single occasion
on which Finkler had either poured the tea or paid for it.

He didn't mention this to Finkler. Couldn't. Not without being accused of

stereotyping him.

They were at Fortnum & Mason, which Treslove liked because it served
old-fashioned rarebits and relishes, and Finkler liked because he could rely
on being recognised there.

'Out  to  get  me?  Out  to  get  me  critically?  There's  nothing  new  in  that.

They've always all been out to get me.'

This  was  Finkler's  fantasy  -  that  they'd  all  always  been  out  to  get  him
critically. In fact no one had been out to get him critically, except Treslove
who  didn't  count,  and  maybe  the  mugger  who'd  got  Treslove  instead.
Though her motives were surely not of the artistic or philosophic sort.

'I don't mean out to get you in that way,' Treslove said.
'So in what way do you mean?'
'Out  to  get  you  in  the  out  to  get  you  sense.'  He  pointed  an  imaginary

pistol at Finkler's gingery temples. 'You know -'

'Out to kill me?'
'No, not kill. Out to rough you up a bit. Out to steal your wallet and your

watch. And I only said it's possible.'

'Oh, well, as long as you think it's only possible. Anything's possible, for

God's sake. What makes you think that this is?'

Treslove told him what had happened. Not the ignominious details. Just
the bare bones. Strolling along in dark. Oblivious. Crack! Head into pane of

Guivier's. Wallet, watch and credit cards gone. All over before you could
say -

'Christ!'
'Quite.'
'And?'
'And what?'
'And where do I come in?'
Self, self, self, Treslove thought. 'And it's possible she had followed me

from Libor's.'

'Hang on. She? What makes you so sure it was a she?'
'I think I know the difference between a she and a he.'
'In the dark? With your nose up against a windowpane?'
'Sam, you know when a woman's assaulting you.'
'Why? How many times has a woman assaulted you?'
'That's not the point. Never. But you know it when it's happening.'
'You felt her up?'
'Of course I didn't feel her up. There wasn't time to feel her up.'
'Otherwise you would have?'
'I have to tell you it didn't cross my mind. It was too shocking for desire.'
'So she didn't feel you up?'
'Sam, she mugged me. She emptied my pockets.'
'Was she armed?'
'Not that I know of.'
'Know of or knew of?'
'What's the difference?'
'You could know now that she wasn't though you thought then that she

was.'

'I don't think that I thought then that she was. But I might have.'
'You let an unarmed woman empty your pockets?'
'I had no choice. I was afraid.'
'Of a woman?'
'Of the dark. Of the suddenness -'
'Of a woman.'
'OK, of a woman. But I didn't know she was a woman at first.'
'Did she speak?'
A  waitress,  bringing  Finkler  more  hot  water,  interrupted  Treslove's
answer. Finkler always asked for more hot water no matter how much hot

water had already been brought. It was his way of asserting power, Treslove
thought. No doubt Nietzsche, too, ordered more hot water than he needed.

'That's sweet of you,' Finkler told the waitress, smiling up at her.
Did  he  want  her  to  love  him  or  be  afraid  of  him?  Treslove  wondered.
Finkler's  lazy  imperiousness  fascinated  him.  He  had  only  ever  wanted  a
woman to love him. Which might have been where he'd gone wrong.

'So let me see if I've got this right,' Finkler said, waiting for Treslove to
pour  the  hot  water  into  the  teapot.  'This  woman,  this  unarmed  woman,
attacks you, and you think it was me she thought she was attacking, because
it's possible she followed you from Libor's - who, incidentally, isn't looking
well, I thought.'

'I  thought  he  looked  fine,  all  things  considered.  I  had  a  sandwich  with
him  the  other  day,  as  you  were  meant  to.  He  looked  fine  then  too.  You
worry me more. Are you getting out?'

'I've seen him myself and he didn't look fine to me. But what's this "out"
concept? What's the virtue in out? Isn't out where there are women waiting
to attack me?'

'You can't live in your head.'
'That's good coming from you. I don't live in my head. I play poker on

the internet. That's nowhere near my head.'

piano.'

'I suppose you win money.'
'Of course. Last week I won three thousand pounds.'
'Jesus!'
'Yeah, Jesus. So you needn't worry about me. But Libor is rubbing at the

pain. He is holding on to Malkie so tight she'll take him with her.'

'That's what he wants.'
'Well, I know you find it touching but it's sickly. He should get rid of that

'And play poker on the Internet?'
'Why not? A big win would cheer him up.'
'What about a big loss? No one wins for ever - someone you've written a
book  about  must  have  said  that.  Isn't  there  a  famous  philosophic  wager?
Hume, was it?'

Finkler  looked  at  him  steadily.  Don't  presume,  the  look  seemed  to  say.
Don't presume on my apparent grieflessness. Just because I haven't gone the
Libor route of turning my life into a shrine doesn't mean I'm callous. You
don't know what I feel.

Or Treslove may just have invented it.
'I suspect you're thinking of Pascal,' Finkler said, finally. 'Only he said
the opposite. He said you might as well wager on God because that way,
even  if  He  doesn't  exist,  you've  nothing  to  lose.  Whereas  if  you  wager
against God and He does exist . . .'

'You're in the shit.'
'I wish I'd said that.'
'You will, Finkler.'
Finkler smiled at the room. 'Anyway,' he said, 'so there you are coming
out  of  Libor's  place  ever  so  slightly  the  worse  for  wear  when  this
muggerette,  mistaking  you  for  me,  follows  you  several  hundred  yards  to
where it's actually lighter - which makes no sense - and duffs you up. What
exactly about the incident links her to me? Or me to you? We don't exactly
look alike, Julian. You're half my size, you've got twice as much hair -'

'Three times as much hair.'
'I'm in a car, you're on foot . . . what would have led her to make that

mistake?'

'What she said or what you think she said - spit it out, Julian.'
So he spat it out. 'You Jew. She said You Jew.'
'You've made that up.'

'Search me . . . Because she had never seen either of us before?'
'And saw you and thought he looks as though he's got a fat wallet, and
what  happened  happened.  I  still  don't  know  why  you  think  she  was  after
me.'

'Maybe  she  knew  you'd  won  three  thousand  pounds  playing  poker.  Or
maybe she was a fan. Maybe a Pascal reader. You know what fans are like.'

'And maybe she wasn't.' Finkler called for more hot water.
'Look,'  Treslove  said,  shifting  in  his  chair,  as  though  not  wanting  the

whole of Fortnum & Mason to hear, 'it was what she said.'

'What did she say?'
'Or at least what I think she said.'
Finkler opened wide his arms Finklerishly. Infinite patience beginning to
run out, the gesture denoted. Finkler reminded Treslove of God when he did
that.  God  despairing  of  His  people  from  a  mountain  top.  Treslove  was
envious.  It  was  what  God  gave  the  Finklers  as  the  mark  of  His  covenant
with them - the ability to shrug like Him. Something on which, as a non-
Finkler, Treslove had missed out.

'Why would I make it up?'
'Because you're a bitter twisted man. I don't know why you'd make it up.
Because you were hearing your own thoughts. You'd just left me and Libor.
You Jews, you were probably thinking. You fucking Jews. The sentence was
in your mouth so you transferred it to hers.'

'She didn't say You fucking Jews. She said You Jew.'
'You Jew?'
Now he heard it on someone else's lips, Treslove couldn't be sure he was

sure. 'I think.'

my name?'

'You think? What could she have said that sounded like You Jew?'
'I've already been through that. You Jules, but then how would she know

'It was on the credit cards she'd stolen from you - doh!'
'Don't doh me. You know I hate being dohed.'
Finkler patted his arm. 'It was on the credit cards she'd stolen from you -

no doh.'

is me?'

'My cards have my initials. J. J. Treslove. No reference to any Julian and
certainly not to any Jules. Let's call a spade a spade, Sam - she called me a
Jew.'

'And you think the only Jew in London she could have confused you for

'We'd just been together.'
'Coincidence. The woman is probably a serial anti-Semite. No doubt she
calls everyone she robs a Jew. It's a generic word among you Gentiles for
anyone  you  don't  much  care  for.  At  school  they  called  it  Jewing  (you
probably called it Jewing yourself) - taking what's not yours. It's what you
see when you see a Jew - a thief or a skinflint. Could be she was Jewing
you back. I Jew You - could she have said that? I Jew You, in the spirit of tit
for tat.'

'She said You Jew.'
'So she got it wrong. It was dark.'
'It was light.'
'You told me it was dark.'
'I was setting the scene.'
'Misleadingly.'
'Poetically. It was dark in the sense of being late, and light in the sense of

being lit by street lamps.'

'Light enough for you patently not to be a Jew?'
'As light as it is here. Do I look a Jew?'
Finkler laughed one of his big television laughs. Treslove knew for a fact
that Finkler never laughed in reality - it had been one of Tyler's complaints
when she was alive that she had married a man who had no laughter in him
-  but  on  television,  when  he  wanted  to  denote  responsiveness,  he  roared.
Treslove marvelled that a single one of Finkler's however many hundreds of
thousand viewers swallowed it.

'Let's  ask  the  room,'  Finkler  said.  And  for  a  terrible  moment  Treslove
thought he just might. Hands up which of you think this man is, or could be
mistaken  for,  a  Jew.  It  would  be  a  way  of  getting  everyone  who  hadn't
already registered Finkler to notice he was there.

Treslove  coloured  and  put  his  head  down,  thinking  as  he  did  so  that  it
was  precisely  this  diffidence  that  put  the  seal  of  non-Jewishness  on  him.
Who had ever met a shy Jew?

'So there you have it,' he said when he at last found the courage to raise

his head. 'You tell me. What would Wittgenstein advise?'

'That you get your head out of your arse. And out of mine and Libor's.
Look - you got mugged. It isn't nice. And you were already in an emotional
state. It's probably not healthy, the three of us meeting the way we do. Not
for you anyway. We have reason. We are in mourning. You aren't. And if
you are, you shouldn't be. It's fucking morbid, Julian. You can't be us. You
shouldn't want to be us.'

'I don't want to be you.'
'Somewhere you do. I don't mean to be cruel but there has always been

some part of us you have wanted.'

'Us? Since when were you and Libor us?'
'That's  an  insensitive  question.  You  know  very  well  since  when.  Now
that's not enough for you. Now you want another part of us. Now you want
to be a Jew.'

Treslove almost choked on his tea. 'Who said I want to be a Jew?'
'You did. What is all this about otherwise? Look, you're not the only one.

Lots of people want to be Jews.'

'Well, you don't.'
'Don't start that. You sound like Libor.'
'Sam  -  Samuel  -  read  my  lips.  I.  Do.  Not.  Want.  To.  Be.  A.  Jew.  OK?

Nothing against them but I like being what I am.'

'Do  you  remember  saying  how  much  you  wished  my  father  had  been

your father?'

certainty.

'I  was  fourteen  at  the  time.  And  I  liked  the  fact  that  he  invited  me  to
punch him in the stomach. I was frightened to touch my own father on the
shoulder. But this had nothing to do with being Jewish.'

'So what are you?'
'I beg your pardon?'
'You said you like being what you are, so what are you?'
'What am I?' Treslove stared at the ceiling. It felt like a trick question.
'Exactly.  You  don't  know  what  you  are  so  you  want  to  be  a  Jew.  Next
you'll be wearing fringes and telling me you've volunteered to fly Israeli jets
against  Hamas.  This,  Julian,  I  repeat,  is  not  healthy.  Take  a  break.  You
should be on the town. "Out" as you call it. Get yourself a bird. Take her on
holiday. Forget about the other stuff. Buy a new wallet and get on with your
life.  I  promise  you  it  wasn't  a  woman  who  stole  your  old  one,  however
much you wish it had been. And whoever it was still more certainly didn't
confuse you with me or call you a Jew.'

Treslove  seemed  almost  crestfallen  in  the  face  of  so  much  philosophic

THREE

1

'Hi, Brad.'

The speaker was a strong-jawed woman in a waterfall of blonde curls and
a limp Regency dress that showed her breasts off to impressive effect. This
was  the  third  time  that  evening  that  Treslove  -  on  his  first  night  back
working  as  a  lookalike  -  had  been  taken  for  Brad  Pitt.  In  fact,  he'd  been
hired  to  look  like  Colin  Firth  in  the  part  of  Mr  Darcy.  It  was  a  lavish
birthday party in a loft in Covent Garden for a fifty-year-old lady of means
whose name really was Jane Austen, so who else could he have been hired
to look like? Everyone was in costume. Treslove, in tight breeches, a white
hero shirt and silk cravat, affected a sulky manner. How then he could be
taken for Brad Pitt he didn't know. Unless Brad Pitt had been in a Pride and
Prejudice production he'd missed.

But  then  everyone  was  drunk  and  vague.  And  the  woman  who  had
accosted him was drunk, vague and American. Even before she opened her
mouth Treslove had deduced all that from her demeanour. She looked too
amazed by life to be English. Her curls were too curly. Her lips were too
big.  Her  teeth  too  white  and  even,  like  one  big  arc  of  tooth  with  regular
vertical  markings.  And  her  breasts  had  too  much  elevation  and  attack  in
them to be English. Had Jane Austen's heroines had breasts like these they
would not have worried about ending up without a husband.

'Guess again,' Treslove said, flushed from the encounter. She was not his
kind  of  woman.  She  would  too  obviously  outlive  him  to  be  his  kind  of
woman, but he found her forwardness arousing. And he too was growing
vague.

'Dustin  Hoffman,'  she  said,  inspecting  his  face.  'No,  I  guess  you're  too
young for Dustin Hoffman. Adam Sandler? No, you're too old. Oh, I know,
Billy Crystal.'

He didn't say Why would Billy Crystal be at a Jane Austen party?
She took him back to her hotel in the Haymarket. Her suggestion. She
was lewd in the taxi, sliding her hand up into his hero shirt and down into
his tight Mr Darcy breeches. Calling him Billy, which it occurred to her, as

they swung past Eros, rhymed with willy. Strange how impure Americans
could be, Treslove thought, for a people puritanical to their souls. Prim and
pornographic all at once.

But he was in no position to be judgemental.
Gratitude  and  a  sense  of  relief  overwhelmed  him.  He  was  still  in  the
game; he was still a player. In fact, he'd never been a player but he knew
what he meant.

He slid his tongue behind her dazzling panorama of teeth, trying without
success to distinguish one tooth from another. He had the same trouble with
her breasts. They didn't divide. They constituted a bosom, singular.

She was so perfect she needed only one of everything.
She was a television producer, over in London for a few days to discuss a
joint venture with Channel 4. He was relieved it wasn't the BBC. He wasn't
sure he could sleep with anyone with BBC connections. Not if he was to
manage a decent erection for any length of time.

In  the  event  he  didn't  manage  a  decent  erection  for  any  length  of  time
because  she  bounced  up  and  down  on  him  in  a  flurry  of  nipple  and  curl
which embarrassed him into prematurity.

'Wow!' she said.
'It's the dress,' he told her. 'I shouldn't have asked you to keep the dress

on. Too many hot associations.'

'Such as?'
'Such as Northanger Abbey and Mansfield Park.'
'I can take it off.'
'No. Keep it on and give me twenty minutes.'
They talked about their favourite Jane Austen characters. Kimberley - of
course  she  was  called  Kimberley  -  liked  Emma.  That  was  who  she  was
being.  Emma  Woodhouse,  handsome,  clever,  rich,  'And  with  her  tits  out,'
she laughed, putting them back in. Or, rather, Treslove thought, putting it
back in.

Taking it back out again, he said he found some of Jane Austen's heroines
a  touch  effervescent  for  his  taste  -  not  Emma,  of  course  not  Emma  -
preferring  Anne  Elliot,  no,  loving,  really  loving  Anne  Elliot.  Why?  Not
sure,  but  he  thought  something  to  do  with  her  running  out  of  time  to  be
happy.

'Drinking  in  the  last-chance  saloon,'  Kimberley  said,  showing  she

understood the nuances of Georgian England.

'Yes,  yes,  something  like  that.  It's  the  idea  of  her  faded  beauty  I  love.

Fading as you read.'

'You love faded beauty!'
'No, God no, not as a rule. I don't mean in life.'
'I should hope not.'
'God no.'
'I'm relieved to hear that.'
'It's the fairy-story quality,' he said, pausing to graze purposefully on her
breast.  'Jane  Austen  waves  her  wand  and  conjures  a  happy  ending  at  the
eleventh hour, but in life it would have been a tragedy.'

She nodded, not listening. 'And now time for you to wave your wand,'
she said, looking at her watch. She had given him exactly twenty minutes.
She no more did approximations than she did tragedy.

'Wow!' she said again five minutes later.
It was the jolliest night of sex Treslove had ever had. A surprise to him
because he didn't do jolly. When he left her in the morning she handed him
her card - in case he was ever in LA, but be careful to give her warning, her
husband  wouldn't  be  that  enthusiastic  about  finding  Billy  Crystal  on  the
doorstep in his Regency breeches. She slapped his behind as he left.

Treslove felt like a prostitute.
 

So what about that prematurity? Treslove, in his street clothes, stopped for
coffee in Piccadilly to think it through. Bounce had never done the business
for Treslove. Bounce, if anything, had always been detrimental to business.
So what, on this occasion, had? The dress undoubtedly had had something
to do with it - Anne Elliot straddling him and shaking her head from side to
side  like  a  Swedish  porn  star.  But  the  dress  alone  could  not  explain  the
alacrity of his appreciation, nor his repeating it at twenty-minute intervals,
not  for  the  entire  night  but  for  more  of  it  than  was  gentlemanly  to  brag
about. Which left only the mugging. He would not have sworn to this in a
court of law but he had a feeling he'd been half thinking about the woman
who had attacked him while Kimberley rose and swelled and wowed! above
him. They were a similar build, he fancied. So was he thinking about her or
seeing her? He couldn't have sworn which of those either.

But  there  was  a  problem  with  this.  The  attack  had  certainly  not
stimulated him sexually at the time. Why would it have? He was not that
kind of a man. A fractured nose was bloody painful, end of, as his sons said.

Nor  had  it  remotely  stimulated  him  in  the  days  following.  And  it  wasn't
doing  anything  for  him  sitting  thinking  of  it  now.  But  something  was.
Recollection of the night before, naturally. It had been a night to be pleased
with and proud of. It hadn't only broken a long drought, it had been a one-
night stand to rival the best of them and Treslove was not by nature a one-
night-stand man. Yet still some further consciousness of excitation or erotic
disturbance nagged away at him.

Then  he  got  it.  Billy  Crystal.  Kimberley  had  taken  him  for  Brad  Pitt
initially,  but  when  she'd  looked  more  closely  into  his  face  she  had  seen
someone else. Dustin Hoffman . . . Adam Sandler . . . Billy Crystal. He had
stopped  her  there,  but  had  she  continued  the  list  would  in  all  likelihood,
given  where  it  was  heading,  have  included  David  Schwimmer,  Jerry
Seinfeld,  Jerry  Springer,  Ben  Stiller,  David  Duchovny,  Kevin  Kline,  Jeff
Goldblum, Woody Allen, Groucho Fucking Marx . . . did he have to go on?

Finklers.
Fucking Finklers every one.
He had read somewhere that every actor in Hollywood was a Finkler by
birth,  whether  or  not  they  kept  their  Finkler  names.  And  Kimberley  -
Kimberley  for  God's  sake;  what  was  her  name  originally:  Esther?  -
Kimberley had mistaken him for all of them.

By mistaken he didn't mean - he couldn't have meant; she couldn't have
meant  -  mistaken  in  appearance.  Even  to  Kimberley's  blurred  vision  he
could  not  have  physically  resembled  Jerry  Seinfeld  or  Jeff  Goldblum.  He
was  the  wrong  size.  He  was  the  wrong  temperature.  He  was  the  wrong
speed. The resemblance he bore to these men must, in that case, have been
of  another  order.  It  must  have  been  a  matter  of  spirit  and  essence.
Essentially he was like them. Spiritually he was like them.

He couldn't have said whether taking him for a Finkler in essence pressed
Kimberley's button - no reason it should have done, if they were all Finklers
where she came from - but what if it pressed his?

Two  such  misidentifications  in  two  weeks.  Never  mind  what  Finkler
himself thought. Finkler was possessive of his Finklerishness. 'Ours is not a
club you can just join,' he had explained to Treslove in the days when he
insisted on being called Samuel.

'I wasn't thinking of joining,' Treslove had told him then.
'No,' Finkler had replied, already losing interest. 'I never said you were.'
So Finkler was not what could be called an uninterested party.

Whereas two women without an axe to grind - two weeks, two women,

two identical misidentifications!

Treslove bit his knuckles, ordered more coffee and allowed his life - his

lying life, was it? - to pass before him.

2

Finkler had asked for it.

Sam had it coming.

That was Tyler Finkler's view at the time and it was Julian Treslove's too.

Tyler Finkler had the better case. Her husband was fucking other women.
Or if he wasn't fucking other women he might as well have been fucking
other women for the amount of attention he was showing her.

Treslove's  case  was  simply  that  Finkler  had  it  coming  because  he  was
Finkler. But he also saw that a woman as beautiful as Tyler shouldn't have
to suffer.

Tyler  Finkler.  The  late  Tyler  Finkler.  Remembering  her  over  a  second

coffee, Treslove sighed a deep sigh.

'Sam's  on  an  all-consuming  project,'  he  had  said  at  the  time.  'He's  an

ambitious man. He was an ambitious boy.'

'My husband was a boy!'
Treslove had smiled weakly. Finkler had not in fact been much of a boy

but it didn't feel right saying so to Finkler's angry wife.

They were lying on Treslove's bed in that suburb he insisted on calling
Hampstead.  They  should  not  have  been  lying  on  Treslove's  bed  in  any
suburb. They both knew that. But Finkler had asked for it.

Tyler had rung Treslove originally to enquire whether it was all right to
come over and watch the first programme of her husband's new series on
Treslove's television. 'Of course,' he had said, 'but won't you be watching it
with Sam?'

'Samuel is watching it with the crew, otherwise known as his mistress.'
Tyler was the only person who still called Sam Samuel. It gave her power
over him, the power of someone who knew an important person before he
became important. Sometimes she went further and called him Shmuelly to
remind him of his origins when he appeared to be in danger of forgetting
them.

'Oh,' Treslove said.

'And the worst thing is that she isn't even the fucking director. She's just

the production assistant.'

'Ah,' Treslove said, wondering if Tyler would have been watching it with
Sam had Sam, more conventionally, been fucking the director. You never
knew quite where you were with Finklers - men or women - when it came
to  matters  that  bore  on  humiliation  and  prestige.  Non-Finklers  judged  all
infidelities  equally,  but  in  his  experience  Finklers  were  prepared  to  make
allowances  if  the  third  party  happened  to  be  someone  important.  Prince
Philip, Bill Clinton, the Pope even. He hoped he wasn't stereotyping them,
thinking that.

'Will you be bringing the children?' Treslove asked.
'The  children?  The  children  are  away  at  school.  They'll  soon  be  at

university. At least pretend to take an interest, Julian.'

'I don't do children,' he explained. 'I don't even do my own.'
'Well, you don't have to worry. We won't be doing any children ourselves.

My body's past all that.'

'Oh,' said Treslove.
This was the first inkling he had that he and his friend's wife would not
be  watching  much  television  that  evening.  'Ha,'  he  said  to  himself,
showering, as though he were the victim of whatever was going to happen,
rather  than  an  active  partner  in  it.  But  there  was  never  the  remotest
possibility that he would be able to resist Tyler, no matter that she was using
him only to get her own back on her husband.

Though she wasn't the sort of woman he normally fell for, he had fallen
for her anyway the first time Sam had introduced her as his wife. He had
not  seen  his  friend  for  a  while  and  did  not  know  he  was  going  out  with
anyone in particular, let alone that there had been a marriage. But that was
Finkler's way. He would lift the hem of his life infinitesimally, just enough
to make Treslove feel intrigued and excluded, before lowering it again.

The newly married Mrs Finkler was not in fact beautiful, but she was as
good as beautiful, dark and angular, with features on which a careless man
could cut himself, and pitiless sarcastic eyes. Though there was little meat
on  her  bones  she  was  somehow  able  to  suggest  sumptuous  occasions.
Whenever Treslove met her she was dressed as for a state banquet, where
she would eat little, talk with assurance, dance gracefully with whoever she
had to, and win admiring glances from the whole room. She was the sort of
woman  a  successful  man  needs.  Competent,  worldly,  coolly  elegant  -  so

long as the man doesn't forget her in his success. The word humid came to
Treslove's mind when he thought about Tyler Finkler. Which was surprising
given  that  she  was  on  the  surface  arid.  But  Treslove  was  imagining  what
she  would  be  like  below  the  surface,  when  he  entered  her  dark  womanly
mysteriousness. She was somewhere he had never been and probably ought
not  to  think  of  going.  She  was  the  eternal  Finkler  woman.  Hence  there
never being the remotest possibility of his refusing her when she offered.
He  had  to  discover  what  it  would  be  like  to  penetrate  the  moist  dark
womanly mysteriousness of a Finkleress.

They put the television on but didn't watch a frame of Sam's programme.
'He's such a liar,' she said, stepping out of a dress she could have worn to
see  her  husband  get  a  knighthood.  'Where's  his  philosophy  when  I  don't
have his dinner ready on time? Where's his philosophy when he should be
keeping his dick in his pants?'

Treslove  said  nothing.  It  was  odd  having  his  friend's  face  on  his
television at the same time as he had his friend's wife in his arms. Not that
Tyler was ever actually in his arms. She liked to be made love to from a
distance  as  though  it  wasn't  really  happening.  Much  of  the  time  she  lay
facing away from Treslove, working on his penis with her hand behind her
back, as though fastening a complicated brassiere, or struggling with a jar
that wouldn't open, while she traduced her husband in running commentary.
She preferred the light on and saw no sensual virtue in silence. Only when
he entered her - briefly, because she told him she did not welcome extended
intercourse - did Treslove find the warm dark Finkleress humidity he had
anticipated. And it exceeded all his imaginings.

He lay on his back and felt the tears well in his eyes. He told her he loved

'Don't be ridiculous,' she said. 'You don't even know me. That was Sam

her.

you were doing it to.'

He sat up. 'It most certainly was not.'
'I don't mind. It suits me. We might even do it again. And if it turns you
on to be doing your friend - doing him or doing him over, let's not finesse
here - it's fine by me.'

Treslove  propped  himself  up  on  his  elbow  to  look  at  her  but  she  was

turned away from him again. He reached out to stroke her hair.

'Don't do that,' she said.
'What you don't understand,' he said, 'is that this is the first time for me.'

'The  first  time  you've  had  sex?'  She  didn't  actually  sound  all  that

'The first time' - it sounded tasteless now he had to put it into words - 'the

surprised.

first time . . . you know . . .'

'The first time you've done the dirty on Samuel? I shouldn't worry about
that. He wouldn't hesitate to do it to you. Probably already has. He sees it as
a  droit  de  philosophe.  Being  a  thinker  he  thinks  he  has  a  right  to  fuck
whoever takes his fancy.'

'I didn't mean that. I meant that you're my first . . .'
He  could  hear  his  hesitancy  irritating  her.  The  bed  chilled  around  her.
'First  what?  Spit  it  out.  Married  woman?  Mother?  Wife  of  a  television
presenter? Woman without a degree?'

'Don't you have a degree?'
'First what, Julian?'
He swallowed the word a couple of times but needed to hear himself say
it.  Saying  it  was  almost  as  sweet  in  its  unholiness  as  doing  it.  'Jew,'  he
finally got out. But that wasn't quite the word he was after either. 'Jewess,'
he said, taking a long time to finish it, letting the heated hiss of all those
ssss linger on his lips.

She turned round as though for the first time she needed to see what he
looked like, her eyes dancing with mockery. 'Jewess? You think I'm actually
a Jewess?'

'Aren't you?'
'That's the nicest question you could have asked me. But where did you

get the idea from that I'm the real deal?'

Treslove couldn't think of what to say, there was so much. 'Everything,'
was all he could come up with in the end. He remembered attending one of
the  Finkler  boys'  bar  mitzvahs  but  as  he  wasn't  sure  which  he  remained
silent on the subject.

'Well, your everything is a nothing,' she said.
He  was  bitterly  upset.  Not  a  Jewess,  Tyler?  Then  what  was  that  dark

humidity he had entered?

She hung her bottom lip at him. (And that, wasn't that Jewish?) 'Do you
honestly  think,'  she  went  on,  'that  Samuel  would  have  married  someone
Jewish?'

'Well, I hadn't thought he wouldn't.'

'Then  how  little  you  know  him.  It's  the  Gentiles  he's  out  to  conquer.
Always  has  been.  You  must  know  that.  He's  done  Jewish.  He  was  born
Jewish.  They  can't  reject  him.  So  why  waste  time  on  them?  He'd  have
married me in a church had I asked him. He was the tiniest bit furious with
me when I didn't.'

'So why didn't you?'
She laughed. A dry rattle from a parched throat. 'I'm another version of
him,  that's  why.  We  were  each  out  to  conquer  the  other's  universe.  He
wanted the goyim to love him. I wanted the Jews to love me. And I liked
the idea of having Jewish children. I thought they'd do better at school. And
boy, have they done better!'

(Her pride in them - wasn't that Jewish as well?)
Treslove  was  perplexed.  'Can  you  have  Jewish  children  if  you're  not

Jewish yourself?'

'Not in the eyes of the Orthodox. Not easily, anyway. But we had a liberal
wedding. And I had to convert even for that. Two years I put in, learning
how to run a Jewish home, how to be a Jewish mother. Ask me anything
you  need  to  know  about  Judaism  and  I  can  tell  you.  How  to  kosher  a
chicken, how to light the Shabbes candles, what to do in a mikva. Do you
want me to tell you how a good Jewish woman knows her period is over? I
am  possessed  of  more  Jewishkeit  than  all  the  echt  Jewish  women  in
Hampstead rolled together.'

Treslove absented himself, mentally rolling together all the echt Jewish

women in Hampstead. But what he asked was, 'What's a mikva?'

'A ritual bath. You go there to cleanse yourself for your Jewish husband

who will die if he encounters a drop of your blood.'

'Sam wanted you to do that?'
'Not Samuel, me. Samuel couldn't have given a monkey's. He thought it
was  barbaric,  worrying  about  menstrual  blood  which  in  point  of  fact  he
quite likes, the sicko. I went to the mikva for me. I found it calming. I'm the
Jew of the two of us even if I was born a Catholic. I'm the Jewish princess
you read about in the fairy stories, only I'm not Jewish. The irony being -'

'That he's out fucking shiksas?'
'Too obvious. I'm still the shiksa to him. If he wants the forbidden he can
get it at home. The irony is that he's out fucking Jews. That lump of lard
Ronit  Kravitz,  his  production  assistant.  I  wouldn't  put  it  past  him  to  be
converting her.'

'I thought you said she's already Jewish.'
'Converting her to Christianity, you fool.'
Treslove  fell  silent.  There  was  so  much  he  didn't  understand.  And  so
much to be upset about. He felt he'd been give a prize he had long coveted,
only  to  have  it  snatched  away  from  him  again  before  he'd  even  found  a
place for it on his mantelpiece. Tyler Finkler, not a Finkler! Therefore the
deep  damp  dark  mysteriousness  of  a  Finkler  woman  was  still,  strictly
speaking - and this was a strict concept or it was nothing - unknown to him.

She began to dress. 'I hope I haven't disappointed you,' she said.
'Disappointed  me?  Hardly.  Will  you  be  coming  for  the  second

programme?'

'You have a think about it.'
'What's there to think about?'
'Oh, you know,' she said.
She didn't kiss him when she left.
But she popped her head back around his door. 'A word from the wise.
Just don't let them catch you saying "Jewess",' she warned him, imitating
the languorous snakiness he had imparted to the word. 'They don't like it.'

 

Always something they didn't like.

But he did as she suggested, and had a think.
He thought about the betrayal of his friend and wondered why he wasn't
guiltier. Wondered whether following Finkler into his wife's vagina was a
pleasure in itself. Not the only pleasure, but a significant contribution to it.
Wondered whether Finkler had in effect koshered his wife from the inside
regardless of her origins, so that he, Treslove, could believe he had as good
as had a Jewess - ess, ess, ess - (which word he mustn't for some reason let
them catch him saying) after all. Or not. And if not, did he have to go back
to the very beginning of wondering what it would be like?

And was still wondering about these and similar mysteries of the religio-

erotic life after Tyler Finkler's tragic death.

3

Normally  a  heavy  sleeper,  Treslove  began  to  lie  awake  night  after  night,
revolving the attack in his mind.

What had happened? How would he tell it to the police, supposing that
he  was  going  to  tell  it  to  the  police,  which  he  wasn't?  He  had  spent  the
evening with two old friends, Libor Sevcik and Sam Finkler, both recently
made  widowers  -  no,  officer,  I  am  not  myself  married  -  discussing  grief,
music and the politics of the Middle East. He had left Libor's apartment at
about 11 p.m., spent a little time looking into the park, smelling foliage - do
I  always  do  that?  no,  only  sometimes  when  I  am  upset  -  and  then  had
ambled back past Broadcasting House, may its name be damned, may its
foundations crumble - only joking - to a part of London where his father
had  owned  a  famous  cigar  shop  -  no,  officer,  I  had  not  been  drinking
inordinately - when without any warning . . .

Without any warning, that was the shocking thing, without the slightest
apprehension  of  danger  or  unease  on  his  part,  and  he  normally  so  finely
attuned to hazard.

Unless . . .
Unless  he  had,  after  all,  as  he  had  turned  into  Mortimer  Street,  seen  a
figure lurking in the shadows on the opposite side of the road, seen it half
emerge from a passageway, still in shadow, a large, looming, but possibly,
very possibly, womanly figure . . .

In which case - the question was conditional: if he had seen him, it, her -
why  had  he  not  minded  himself  more,  why  had  he  turned  to  Guivier's
window, presenting his defencelesss neck to whatever harm anyone, man or
woman, might choose to do him . . .

Culpability.
Culpability again.
 

But did it matter what he'd seen or hadn't seen?

For some reason it did. If he'd seen her and invited her to attack him - or
at  least  permitted  her  to  attack  him  -  that  surely  explained,  or  part
explained, what she had said. He knew it was not morally or intellectually
acceptable to accuse Jews of inviting their own destruction, but was there a
proneness  to  disaster  in  these  people  which  the  woman  had  recognised?
Had he, in other words, played the Finkler?

And if he had, why had he?
One  question  always  led  to  another  with  Treslove.  Let's  say  he  had
played the Finkler, and let's say the woman had observed it - did that justify
her attacking him?

Whatever  explanation  could  be  found  for  his  actions,  what  pos-sible
explanation could be found for hers? Was a man no longer free to play the
Finkler  when  the  fancy  took  him?  Let's  say  he  had  been  standing  staring
into  the  window  of  J.  P.  Guivier  looking  like  Horowitz,  or  Mahler,  or
Shylock,  say,  or  Fagin,  or  Billy  Crystal,  or  David  Schwimmer,  or  Jerry
Seinfeld,  or  Jerry  Springer,  or  Ben  Stiller,  or  David  Duchovny,  or  Kevin
Kline, or Jeff Goldblum, or Woody Allen, or Groucho Fucking Marx, was
that any reason for her to attack him?

Was being a Finkler an open invitation to assault?
So far he had taken it personally - you do when someone calls you by
your name, or something very like, and gets you to empty your pockets -
but what if this was a random anti-Semitic attack that just happened to have
gone wrong only in the sense that he wasn't a Semite? How many more of
these  incidents  were  taking  place?  How  many  real  Finklers  were  being
attacked in the streets of the capital every night? Round the corner from the
BBC, for Christ's sake!

He wondered who to ask. Finkler himself was not the man to tell him.
And  he  didn't  want  to  frighten  Libor  by  asking  him  how  many  Jews  got
beaten up outside his door most evenings. Not expecting to find anything
post-thirteenth-century Chelmno, he looked up 'Anti-Semitic Incidents' on
the internet and was surprised to find upwards of a hundred pages. Not all
of them round the corner from the BBC, it was true, but still far more in
parts of the world that called themselves civilised than he would ever have
imagined.  One  well-maintained  site  gave  him  the  option  to  choose  by
country. He started from far away -

venezuela:
And  read  that  in  Caracas  about  15  armed  men  had  tied  up  a  security
guard  and  forced  their  way  into  a  synagogue,  defacing  its  administrative
offices with anti-Semitic graffiti and throwing Torah scrolls to the ground in
a rampage that lasted nearly five hours. Graffiti left at the scene included
the phrases 'Damn the Jews', 'Jews out', 'Israeli assassins' and a picture of a
devil.

The  devil  detail  intrigued  him.  It  meant  that  these  fifteen  men  had  not
gone out on the razzle, found themselves outside a synagogue and forced
their way in on a whim. For who goes out on a razzle with a picture of the
devil in his pocket?

argentina:

heads off?

Then tried closer to home.
france:
And  read  that  in  Fontenay-sous-Bois  a  man  wearing  a  Star  of  David

necklace was stabbed in the head and neck.

In  Nice,  'Death  to  Jews'  was  spray-painted  on  the  walls  of  a  primary

And  read  that  in  Buenos  Aires  a  crowd  celebrating  Israel's  anniversary
was  attacked  by  a  gang  of  youths  armed  with  clubs  and  knives.  Three
weeks  earlier,  on  Holocaust  Memorial  Day  -  here  we  go,  Holocaust,
Holocaust - an ancient Jewish cemetery was defaced with swastikas.

canada:
Canada? Yes, Canada.
And  read  that  in  the  course  of  Canada's  now  annual  Israeli  Apartheid
Week  events  held  on  campuses  throughout  the  country  security  officers
roughed up Jewish hecklers, one of them warning a Jewish student to 'shut
the fuck up or I'll saw your head off '.

Was that a home-grown Canadian deterrent, he wondered, sawing Jews'

school. So death to Jews of all ages.

In Bischheim, three Molotov cocktails were thrown at a synagogue.
In  Creteil,  two  sixteen-year-old  Jews  were  beaten  in  front  of  a  kosher

restaurant by a gang that shouted 'Palestine will win, dirty Jews!'

germany:
What, they were still doing it in fucking Germany?
And didn't bother to read what they were still doing in fucking Germany.
england:
England his England. And read that in Manchester a thirty-one-year-old
Jew  was  beaten  by  several  men  who  shouted  'for  Gaza'  as  they  attacked
him, leaving him with a black eye and several bruises.

In Birmingham, a twelve-year-old schoolgirl fled a mob of children no

older than she was chanting 'Death to Jews'.

And in London, just around the corner from the BBC, a forty-nine-year-
old blue-eyed Gentile with orderly features was robbed of his valuables and
called a Ju.

He rang Finkler after all to say how nice it had been to see him and did
he know that in Caracas and in Buenos Aires and in Toronto - yes, Toronto!
- and in Fontenay-sous-Bois and in London, but Finkler stopped him there .
. .

'I'm not saying it makes pleasant listening,' he said, 'but it's not exactly

Kristallnacht, is it?'

 

An  hour  later,  after  thinking  about  it,  Treslove  rang  again.  'Kristallnacht
didn't happen out of nowhere,' he said, though he had only a vague idea of
what Kristallnacht did happen out of.

'Ring me when a Jew gets murdered for being a Jew on Oxford Street,'

Finkler said.

4

Though it wasn't Kristallnacht, the unprovoked attack on him for being a
Jew  had  become  in  Treslove's  imagination  little  short  of  an  atrocity.  He
admitted to himself that he was overexcited. The night with Kimberley, her
misattribution of Jewish characteristics to him, as a consequence of which,
he was bound to consider, he might just have had - at forty-nine! - the best
sex of his life (well, at least they had both smiled during it), and the sense
of history swirling around him, all made him an unreliable witness to his
own life.

Did he any longer remember what actually had happened?
He decided to revisit the scene of the crime, re-run the evening's events,
not starting with dinner at Libor's - he didn't want to involve Libor, he had
kept  the  whole  thing  from  Libor,  Libor  had  troubles  enough  -  but  at  the
gates  to  Regent's  Park.  It  had  turned  chillier  in  the  weeks  since  the
mugging, so he was not able to dress as he had on the night in question.
Muffled  up,  he  looked  bulkier,  but  otherwise  his  assailant  -  Judith,  as  he
now called her - had she too returned to the scene of the crime, would have
recognised him.

He  had  no  choice  but  to  name  her  Judith.  Something  to  do  with  the
Canadian security man threatening to saw the Jewish student's head off. It
was Judith who beheaded Holofernes. True, she was Jewish herself, but her
action  had  a  similiar  whiff  of  vengeful  Middle  Eastern  violence  about  it.
Where Treslove came from - call it Hampstead, to save time - people left
even their enemies' heads on their shoulders.

To be on the safe side he had left his phone and his credit cards at home.
So what was he doing - inviting her to rough him up again? Come on,
Judith, do your worst. Hoping she would rough him up again? (Only this

time she would find him, forewarned and forearmed, a tougher proposition.)
Or  just  wanting  to  confront  her,  the  Jew-hater,  eyeball  to  eyeball,  and  let
fate decide the rest?

No to any one of those, but maybe yes, in an investigative way, to all of

them.

Somewhere  at  the  back  of  his  disordered  mind,  too,  was  forming  the
resolution to apprehend her, if she so much as showed her face, and effect a
citizen's arrest.

He clung to the park gates and looked in, breathing the foliage. He could
not  be  light-headed  again  to  will,  could  not  make  himself  innocent  of  a
knowledge  which  now  crowded  out  all  other  thoughts.  But  had  he  been
innocent a fortnight earlier? Or had he been looking for trouble?

There'd been Finkler talk at Libor's, he remembered that. He remembered
the old sensation of exclusion, envying the men their animal warmth even
as they'd argued routinely on the Finkler question of the hour, each of them
saying  'Oh,  here  we  go'  every  time  the  other  spoke,  as  though  mutual
mistrust  was  stamped  into  Finklers  like  the  name  of  a  seaside  resort  into
rock - Here we go, here we go - just as mutual love appeared to be. So he
had their musk on him. Anyone who didn't especially care for that particular
smell would have detected it on him. He suddenly wondered whether it was
a mistake not to call on Libor and share a glass of wine with him. Could he
hope to reproduce the other evening without having had proximity at least
to Libor first?

He doubled back on himself and rang the bell. No one answered. Libor
was  out,  then,  maybe  on  another  date,  making  himself  discuss  star  signs
with a girl too young to have heard of Jane Russell. Unless he was lying up
there collapsed across the Bechstein with an emptied bottle of aspirin on the
keyboard and a piano-wire noose around his throat, as he, Treslove, would
be, had Malkie been his wife and left him all alone in the world.

His eyes filled with tears, hearing the Schubert in his head. Why hadn't
his father let him play? What had he been afraid of in his son? Morbidity?
Finkler's word. What was so wrong with morbidity?

He  trod  his  way  gingerly  past  the  dangers,  spiritual  and  actual,  of
Broadcasting  House  and  rounded  Nash's  church  again.  He  wasn't  sure  he
could remember exactly the route he had taken on the night of the assault,
but knew he had dawdled among the wholesale clothes showrooms where
his father's cigar shop had been, so he tried up Riding House Street and then

back down Mortimer Street towards J. P. Guivier, only he had to make sure
he approached the violin shop from the right direction, which necessitated -
he  thought  -  returning  the  way  he'd  come  and  staying  a  little  longer  on
Regent Street before cutting in again. Once off Regent Street he reminded
himself to take more notice of shapes in doorways than was his customary
practice. He also thought it a good idea to make himself appear more than
usually vulnerable, though anyone who knew him would not have noticed
any difference either in his gait or general air of agitation.

The streets were about as busy as they had been a fortnight earlier. The
same hairdresser's and dim sum restaurant were open for late business. The
same newsagent's was still undergoing renovation. But for the nip in the air
the nights were identical. Treslove approached J. P. Guivier with his heart in
his  mouth.  Foolish,  he  knew.  The  woman  who  attacked  him  must  have
better things to do than wait in the shadows on the off chance he'd return.
And for what? She already had his only valuables.

But since none of it had added up then, there was no reason why it should
add up now. What if she regretted what she had done and wanted to give
him his valuables back? Or perhaps the mugging was just a taster of what
she really had in store in him. A knife in his heart, maybe. A pistol at his
head. A saw at his throat. Payback for some imaginary wrong he had done
her.  Or  payback  for  some  real  wrong  she  had  suffered  at  the  hands  of
Finkler with whom she had confused him.

That possibility was truly frightening - not the being mistaken for Sam
Finkler, though that was insult enough, but the being held responsible for
something  Finkler  had  done.  Treslove  didn't  put  it  past  Finkler  to  hurt  a
woman  and  drive  her  to  the  edge  of  madness.  He  imagined  dying  for
Finkler, lying bleeding on the pavement, unattended, for a crime he had not
and could never have committed. His legs went weak under him with the
bitter irony of it. An ironical end to his life was not an abstract supposition
for Treslove: he apprehended it as he apprehended a looming lamp-post or a
falling tree.

And saw himself kicked out of the way by passers-by, like a Jew's dog on
the streets of Caracas, or Buenos Aires, or Fontenay-sous-Bois, or Toronto.
He stood before the window of J. P. Guivier admiring the instruments in
their  cases  and  the  resins,  a  new  satisfying  arrangement  of  which  had
appeared - packaged like expensive chocolates - since he'd last looked. A

hand tapped him on the shoulder - 'Judith!' he cried in shock - and the blood
left his body.

FOUR

1

Treslove  was  no  Finkler.  He  could  not  lose  his  heart  to  more  than  one
woman  at  a  time.  He  loved  too  absorbedly  for  that.  But  he  always  knew
when  he  was  about  to  be  thrown  over  and  was  quick  to  make  provision,
where he could, to love absorbedly again. As a consequence of which there
was  sometimes  a  brief  overlap  of  new  and  old.  On  principle  he  didn't
mention this to either of the overlapping parties - neither the one who had
still  not  quite  left  him,  nor  the  one  who  had  not  quite  taken  her  place.
Women were already hurt enough, in his view; there was no reason to hurt
them  further.  In  this,  again,  he  saw  himself  as  different  to  Finkler  who
evidently did not bother to conceal his mistresses from his wife. Treslove
envied  Finkler  his  mistresses  but  accepted  they  were  beyond  him.  Even
wives were beyond Treslove. Girlfriends were all he had ever managed. But
there was still propriety in keeping overlapping girlfriends apart.

By the same reasoning he would have kept his sons apart, too, had he not
confused  the  day  of  his  right  to  have  Rodolfo  (Treslove  didn't  hold  with
anglicising their names) with the day of his right to have Alfredo. The boys
were  six  and  seven,  though  Treslove  couldn't  be  expected  always  to  be
precise in the matter of which was what. He didn't see enough of them for
that,  and  in  their  absence  found  it  easier  to  conflate  them.  Was  that  so
serious?  They  were  equally  objects  of  devotion  to  him.  That  he  merged
their  names  and  ages  only  went  to  show  how  very  much  and  without
favouritism he loved them both.

At around about this time - give or take half an hour - in a restaurant close
by - give or take a quarter of a mile - Treslove's sons were settling the bill
for  dinner.  They  were  in  the  company  of  their  mothers.  This  was  not  the
first time the two women had met, though they had known nothing of each
other's  existence  in  the  months  they  were  carrying  Ralph  and  Alf
respectively,  or  indeed  in  the  years  immediately  following  their  sons'
delivery.

A surprise to each other on the day they met at their father's apartment,
but  infinitely  preferring  playing  with  someone  roughly  their  own  age  to
kicking a ball around a desolate park with Treslove - who tired easily, was
always looking somewhere else, and when he did remember they were there
asked too many soulful questions about the state of their mothers' health -
Alf and Ralph begged their father to confuse his visiting rights again.

The boys talked excitedly of their new half-brothers when they returned
home,  and  soon  Treslove  was  in  receipt  of  unkind  letters  from  his  old

girlfriends  -  in  the  case  of  Rodolfo's  mother,  reproaching  him  for  a
retrospective infidelity she wanted it to be clear she was hurt by only in the
abstract, and in the case of Alfredo's, informing him his visiting rights were
suspended  until  he  heard  otherwise  from  her  lawyers.  But  eventually  the
wishes of the boys prevailed over the indolent malice (as Treslove called it)
of their mothers, and in time the latter thought that they too might find a
bristling sort of comfort in each other's company, not to say an answer to
the question of why not just one woman but two had consented to have a
baby by a man they didn't give a fig for. An inaccurate account, Treslove
believed  when  it  was  relayed  to  him,  given  that  consent  on  the  one  side
implies  request  on  the  other,  and  he  had  never  in  his  life  requested  any
woman to have his baby. Why would he? The curtain always came down on
Treslove's  fantasy  of  happiness  with  him  crying  'Mimi!'  or  'Violetta!'  and
kissing the cold dead lips a last goodbye that would leave him inconsolable
for  ever.  He  couldn't  have  done  that  with  a  child  there.  A  child  turned  a
tragic  opera  into  an  opera buffa  and  necessitated  at  least  another  act,  for
which Treslove lacked both the stamina and imagination.

The women were taken aback, when they first met, by how alike not just

like a gasp, that frilled her narrow lips.

'That's assuming you have his defections in the right chronological order,'
Janice  replied.  Her  lips,  too,  were  scalloped  like  the  hem  of  a  lace
undergarment and seemed to move sideways rather than up and down.

Neither was sure which of them was on the scene first, and the ages of
the  boys  didn't  help,  since  Treslove  was  not  exactly  a  clean  finisher  with
women and sometimes visited an old girlfriend when he was with a new.
But they both agreed he was a man who needed to be given his marching
orders - 'Chop, chop,' in Janice words - and that they were equally lucky to
be rid of him.

Treslove had met Josephine at the BBC and been sorry for her. The best-
looking  women  at  the  BBC  were  the  Jewesses  but  he  didn't  have  the
courage  in  those  days  to  approach  a  Jewess.  And  it  was  partly  because

the boys but they were.

'I could understand him going for a dark woman with large breasts and
rounded  thighs  and  a  fiery  Latin  temperament,'  Josephine  said,  'but  what
could he possibly have thought he was seeing in you that he hadn't already
got from me? We're both scrawny Anglo-Saxon cows.'

She was unamused but tried for laughter - an exhalation of sour breath,

Josephine  had  neither  the  coloration  nor  the  confidence  of  the  BBC
Jewesses that he felt sorry for her - though only partly. For all that she was,
as she admitted, scrawny, she had the broad legs of a much larger woman
which  she  drew  attention  to  by  wearing  spidery  patterned  stockings.  She
was fond of lacy see-through blouses through which Treslove saw that she
wore the brassiere of a woman twice her breast size together with at least
one  slip,  something  he  believed  was  called  a  chemise,  and  something  he
recalled his mother referring to as a liberty bodice. Sitting opposite her at an
awards ceremony - she was the recipient of a Sony Radio Academy Award
for a programme she had made about the male menopause - Treslove, who
was not the recipient of an award for anything, counted five straps on each
of her shoulders. She blushed when she accepted her award - making a brief
speech about unpacking a raft of ideas, which was how people at the BBC
described  having  a  thought  -  just  as  she  blushed  whenever  Treslove
accosted her in the corridor or the canteen, her skin remaining blotchy for
hours  afterwards.  Treslove  understood  the  shame  that  went  with  blushing
and  invited  her  to  hide  herself  from  the  world  by  burying  her  face  in  his
shoulder.

'It's humiliation that makes us human,' he whispered into her dead hair.
'Who's humiliated?'
He did the decent thing. 'I am,' he said.
She  had  his  baby,  aggressively,  without  telling  him.  Other  than  for  his
neat, even features, he was the last man she would have wanted for a father
of her child. Why in that case she wanted his child she didn't know. Why
did  she  want  any  child?  Couldn't  face  the  abortion  was  as  good  an
explanation  as  any.  And  there  were  many  women  she  knew  who  were
bringing  up  children  on  their  own.  It  was  in  the  air  at  the  time  -  single-
mother chic. She might have tried lesbianism out of similar motives, only
she could no more go the final yard of that than have an abortion.

Spite probably explained it as much as anything. She had Treslove's baby

to punish him.

Treslove fell for Janice in anticipation of the raging Josephine's rejection
of him, unless it was the other way round. The women were right to notice
their  resemblance.  All  Treslove's  women  resembled  one  another  a  bit,
soliciting his pity by their neurasthenic paleness, by their being somehow
out of time, not just in the dancing sense, though they were all bad dancers,
but in the language and fashion sense as well, not a one of them knowing

how  to  use  language  that  was  current  or  to  put  together  two  items  of
clothing  that  matched.  It  wasn't  that  he  didn't  notice  and  admire  robust,
fluent  women  who  dressed  well,  it  was  simply  that  he  didn't  see  how  he
could make life better for them.

Or they for him, given that a robust woman held out small promise of a

premature expiry.

Janice owned one pair of boots which she wore in all seasons, repairing
them with Sellotape when they threatened to fall apart. Over the boots she
wore a filmy gypsy skirt of no colour that Treslove could distinguish and
over that a grey-and-blue cardigan the sleeves of which she wore long, as
though  to  protect  her  fingertips  from  the  cold.  In  all  weathers,  Janice's
extremities were cold, like those of an orphan child, as Treslove imagined,
in  a  Victorian  novel.  She  was  not  in  the  employ  of  the  BBC,  though  it
seemed to Treslove that she would have fitted in remarkably well with the
BBC women he knew, and might even have cut a dash among them. An art
historian who had written voluminously on the spiritual void in Malevich
and Rothko, she appeared regularly on the sort of unremarked and barely
funded arts programmes that Treslove worked through the night to produce.
Her  speciality  was  the  absence  of  something  in  male  artists,  an  absence
which she was gentler on than was the fashion at the time. Treslove felt an
erotic sorrow for her well up inside him the minute she walked shivering
into his studio and put headphones on. They appeared to squeeze the last of
the lifeblood from her temples.

'If  you  think  I'm  going  to  let  you  fuck  me  on  our  first  date,'  she  said,

letting him fuck her on their first date, 'you've got another think coming.'

Her explanation for that later was that what they'd been on wasn't a date.
So  he  asked  her  out  on  a  date.  She  turned  up  wearing  long  Edwardian
opera gloves which she'd bought at a jumble sale, and wouldn't let him fuck
her.

'Then let's go out not on a date,' he said.
She told him you couldn't plan not being on a date, because then it was a

'Let's neither go on a date nor not go on a date,' he suggested. 'Let's just

date.

fuck.'

She slapped his face. 'What kind of woman do you think I am?' she said.
One of the pearl buttons on the opera gloves cut Treslove's cheek. The

gloves were so dirty he feared septic poisoning.

They  stopped  seeing  each  other  after  that,  which  meant  he  was  free  to

'Give  it  to  me,'  she  told  him  between  gasps  for  air,  as  though  reading

fuck her.

words on the ceiling.

He pitied her to his soul.
But that didn't stop him giving it to her.
And  perhaps  she  pitied  him.  Of  Treslove's  girlfriends  of  this  period
Janice was possibly the only one who felt anything that could be described
as  affection  for  him,  though  not  to  the  extent  of  enjoying  his  company.
'You're not a bad man exactly,' she told him once. 'I don't mean you're not
bad-looking  or  not  bad  in  bed,  I  mean  you're  not  malevolent.  There's
something missing from you, but it isn't goodness. I don't think you wish
anyone harm per se. Not even women.' So it was possible she at least had
his baby because she thought it would be not a bad thing to have. Per se.

But she told him she wanted to bring the child up on her own, which he

told her was all right with him, but why.

'It  would  be  just  too  hard  going  any  other  way,'  she  said.  'No  offence

intended.'

'None taken,' Treslove told her, deeply hurt yet relieved. He would miss

her chilled extremities but not a baby.

What  annoyed  the  two  women  most  when  they  made  each  other's
acquaintance  and  met  each  other's  sons  -  in  whom  they  separately  noted
Treslove's  unremarkable,  not  to  say  nondescript  handsomeness  -  was  the
discovery that they had both so far capitulated to Treslove's influence as to
call their children Rodolfo and Alfredo. In those days Treslove alternated
playing  records  of  La  Boheme  with  records  of  La  Traviata.  Without
knowing  that  they  knew  either  opera  both  women  in  fact  knew  them
backwards, particularly the love duets and the heartbreaking finales when
Treslove  as  Rodolfo  or  Alfredo  would  call  out  their  names,  'Mimi!'  or
'Violetta!', sometimes confusing the operas, but always with the desperate
plaintiveness of a man who believed that without them - Mimi or Violetta -
his own life was over.

'He taught me to hate those bastard operas,' Josephine told Janice, 'and I
wouldn't mind but I wasn't ever even going to tell him about Alfredo, so
why did I call him Alfredo? Can you explain that to me?'

'Well I know why I called Rodolfo Rodolfo. Paradoxical as it may sound,
it was to get Julian out of my system. It was all so deathly, I thought that if I

substituted a new life for all that dying we'd be the better for it.'

'Oh God, I know what you mean. Do you think he was capable of being

with a living woman?'

'No.  Nor  a  living  child.  That's  why  I  kept  Rodolfo  from  him.  I  was
frightened  he'd  play  operas  to  him  in  his  cot  and  fill  his  little  head  with
nerve-worn women with cold hands.'

'Me the same,' Josephine said, thinking that, as the son of Janice, Rodolfo
had no choice but to have his little head filled with nerve-worn women with
cold hands.

'They're always the worst, the romantics, don't you think?'
'Absolutely. You want to swat them off you. Like leeches.'
'Except that you can't just swat a leech, can you? You have to burn them

off.'

'Yes.  Or  pour  alcohol  on  them.  But  you  know  what  I  mean.  They're
always telling you how desperately in love with you they are while looking
for the next woman.'

'Yes, they always have their cases packed, mentally.'
'Exactly. Though I packed first.'
'Me too.'
'Christ,  and  those  operas!  When  I  think  of  all  that  dying  on  the  record

player . . .'

'I know. "Oh God, to die so young!" I don't just hear it, I can smell the
sickbeds. Still. To this day. I sometimes think he's exerting his consumptive
influence from afar.'

'Puccini?'
'No, Julian. But in fact it's Verdi. Yours is Puccini.'
'How does he do it?'
'Puccini?'
'No, Julian.'
'Frisk me.'
So once every two or three years they would meet, using the pretext of
Alf's  or  Ralph's  birthday,  or  some  other  anniversary  they  were  able  to
concoct, such as their leaving Treslove, and never mind who left him first.
And the custom continued even when the boys had grown up and left home.
Tonight, in line with their current practice, they had avoided all mention
of  Treslove  who  occupied  more  of  their  conversational  space  than  he
merited at the best of times, but who had in addition become something of

an embarrassment to them now that he was doing what he was doing for a
living. He remained Alf's and Ralph's father, no matter how much water had
flowed under the bridge, and they would have liked to be able to say that
their  sons'  father  had  done  more  with  his  life  than  become  a  celebrity
double.

But as they were gathering their coats, Josephine took Rodolfo, Janice's
boy, aside. 'Heard from your papa recently?' she asked. It appeared to be a
question she was unable to ask her own son.

He shook his head.
'What about you?' Janice asked Alfredo.
'Well,' said Alfredo, 'it's funny you should mention him . . .'
And they had to ask the waiter if he minded their sitting down again.

2

'So who's Judith?'

Had Treslove's legs given way under him, as they threatened to do, it was

unlikely Libor Sevcik would have had the strength to pull him up.

'Libor!'
'Did I frighten you?'
'What does it look like?'
'I asked the wrong question. How come I frightened you?'
Treslove made to look at his watch before remembering he no longer had
a watch to look at. 'It's the dead of night, Libor,' he said, as though reading
from his empty wrist.

'I don't sleep,' Libor told him. 'You know I don't sleep.'
'I didn't know you walked the streets.'
'Well, I don't as rule. Only if it's bad. Tonight was bad. Last night too was
bad. But I didn't know you walked the streets either. Why didn't you ring
my bell, we could have strolled together?'

'I'm not strolling.'
'Who's Judith?'
'Don't ask me. I don't know any Judith.'
'You called her name.'
'Judith? You're mistaken. I might have said Jesus. You gave me a shock.'
'If you weren't strolling and you weren't expecting Judith, what were you

doing - choosing a cello?'

'I always look in this window.'
'So do I. Malkie brought me here to get my fiddle valued. It's one of our

Stations of the Cross.'

'You believe in the cross?'
'No, but I believe in suffering.'
Treslove touched his friend's shoulder. Libor looked smaller tonight than
he  remembered  him,  as  though  the  streets  diminished  him.  Unless  it  was
being without Malkie that did it.

'And did they give you a good valuation on your fiddle?' he asked. It was

that or weep.

'Not  so  good  that  it  was  worth  parting  with.  But  I  promised  Malkie  I
would no longer insist on our playing duets. My fiddling was the only part
of me she didn't adore, and she didn't want there to be any part of me she
didn't adore.'

'Were you really no good?'
'I  thought  I  was  very  good,  but  I  wasn't  in  Malkie's  class,  despite  my

being related to Heifetz on my mother's side.'

'You're related to Heifetz? Jesus!'
'You mean Judith!'
'You never told me you were related to Heifetz.'
'You never asked.'
'I didn't know Heifetz was Czech.'
'He wasn't. He was Lithuanian. My mother's family came originally from
that porous Polish-Czech border area known as Suwalki. Every country has
occupied it. The Red Army gave it to the Germans so that they could kill
the  Jews  there.  Then  they  took  it  back  to  kill  any  that  were  left.  I'm
Heifetz's  fourth  or  fifth  cousin  but  my  mother  always  made  out  we  were
half-brothers.  She  rang  me  from  Prague  when  she  read  that  Heifetz  was
playing  at  the  Albert  Hall  and  made  me  solemnly  promise  I  would  go
backstage to introduce myself. I tried, but this is a long time ago, I didn't
have the connections then that I had later and I hadn't yet learned how to
manage  without  them.  His  flunkeys  gave  me  a  signed  photograph  and
ordered me to leave. "So what did he say?" my mother asked me the next
day. "He sent his love," I told her. Sometimes it does no harm to lie. "And
did  he  look  well?"  Marvellous.  "And  his  playing?"  Superb.  "And  he
remembered everybody?" By name. To you he blew a kiss.'

And standing there outside J. P. Guivier's at eleven o'clock on a London
night he made the kiss, the lugubrious Baltic kiss that Heifetz would have
blown his mother had Libor only been able to get to him.

Jews, Treslove thought, admiringly. Jews and music. Jews and families.

Jews and their loyalties. (Finkler excepted.)

'But  you,'  Libor  said,  taking  Treslove's  arm,  'what  really  brings  you  to
this window if it isn't Judith? I haven't heard from you for days. You don't
ring,  you  don't  write,  you  don't  knock.  You  tell  me  you're  too  agitated  to
come  out.  And  here  you  are  a  hundred  yards  from  my  door.  You  have,  I
hope, some explanation for this uncharacteristic behaviour.'

And suddenly Treslove, who loved it when Libor linked his arm in the
street, feeling it made a clever little wizened European Jew of him, knew he
had to spill the beans.

'Let's find a cafe,' he suggested.
'No, let's go back to my place,' Libor said.
'No, let's find a cafe. We might see her.'
'Her? Who's her? This Judith woman?'
Rather than tell him all at once, Treslove agreed to go home with Libor.
 

It was Libor's view that Treslove was overwrought - had been for some time
-  and  probably  needed  a  holiday.  They  could  go  away  together  to
somewhere warm. Rimini, maybe. Or Palermo.

'That's what Sam said.'
'That  you  and  I  should  go  to  Rimini  or  that  you  and  he  should  go  to

Rimini? Why don't we all go?'

'No, that I was overwrought. In fact, he thought I needed to see less of
you  both,  not  more.  Too  much  death,  was  his  diagnosis.  Too  many
widowers in my life. And this guy's a philosopher, don't forget.'

'Then do as he says. I'll miss you, but take his advice. I have friends in
Hollywood  I  could  introduce  you  to.  Or  at  least  the  great-great-
grandchildren of friends.'

'Why  is  it  so  difficult  for  people  to  believe  that  what  happened,

happened?'

'Because women don't mug men, that's why. Me a woman might have had
a shot at. Me you can blow over. But you - you're still young and strong.
That's A. B, women don't make a practice of attacking men in the street and

calling  them  Jew,  especially,  C,  when  they're  not  Jewish.  C's  good.  C
clinches it.'

'Well, that's what she did and that's what she said.'
'That's what you think she said.'
Treslove settled down into the plush discomfort of Libor's Biedermeier

sofa.

'Just what if?' he asked, taking hold of the wooden arm, anxious not to

put his hands on the fabric, so exquisitely taut was it.

'What if what?'
'What if she was right?'
'That you're . . .?'
'Yes.'
'But you're not.'
'We think I'm not.'
'And did you ever before think you were?'
'No . . . Well, yes. I was a musical boy. I listened to operas and wanted to

play the violin.'

'That doesn't make you Jewish. Wagner listened to operas and wanted to
play  the  violin.  Hitler  loved  opera  and  wanted  to  play  the  violin.  When
Mussolini  visited  Hitler  in  the  Alps  they  played  the  Bach  double  violin
concerto together. "And now let's kill some Jews," Hitler said when they'd
finished. You don't have to be Jewish to like music.'

'Is that true?'
'That you don't have to be Jewish to like music? Of course it's true.'
'No, about Hitler and Mussolini.'
'Who cares if it's true. You can't libel a dead Fascist. Listen, if you were
what this imaginary woman said you were, and you'd have wanted to play
the violin, you'd have played the violin. Nothing would have stopped you.'

'I  obeyed  my  father.  Doesn't  that  prove  something?  I  respected  his

wishes.'

'Obeying  your  father  doesn't  make  you  a  Jew.  Obeying  your  mother
would make you more of one. While your father's not wanting you to play
the  violin  almost  certainly  makes  him  not  a  Jew.  If  there's  one  thing  all
Jewish fathers agree on -'

'Sam would say that's stereotyping. And you leave out the possibility that
my father didn't want me to play the violin for the reason that he didn't want
me to be like him.'

'He was a violinist?'
'Yes. Like you. See?'
'And why wouldn't he have wanted you to be like him? Was he that bad a

violinist?'

'Libor, I'm trying to be serious. He might have had his reasons.'
'I'm  sorry.  But  in  what  way  would  he  have  wanted  you  to  be  different

from him? Was he unhappy? Did he suffer?'

Treslove  thought  about  it.  'Yes,'  he  said.  'He  took  things  hard.  My
mother's  death  broke  his  heart.  But  there  was  something  broken-hearted
about him before that. As though he knew what was coming and had been
preparing himself for it all his life. He could have been protecting me from
deep feelings, saving me from something he feared in himself, something
undesirable, dangerous even.'

'The Jews aren't the only broken-hearted people in the world, Julian.'
Treslove  looked  disappointed  to  hear  it.  He  blew  out  his  cheeks,
breathing  hard,  and  shook  his  head,  appearing  to  be  disagreeing  with
himself as much as with Libor.

'Let me tell you something,' he said. 'In all the time I was growing up I
didn't once hear the word Jew. Don't you think that's strange? Nor, in all the
time  I  was  growing  up,  did  I  meet  a  Jew  in  my  father's  company,  in  my
father's shop, or in my parents' home. Every other word I heard. Every other
kind of person I met. Hottentots I met in my father's shop. Tongans I met.
But never a Jew. Not until I met Sam did I even know what a Jew looked
like. And when I brought him home my father told me he didn't think he
made a suitable friend. "That Finkler," he used to ask me, "that Finkler, are
you still kicking about with him?" Explain that.'

'Easy. He was an anti-Semite.'
'If he'd been an anti-Semite, Libor, Jew would have been the only word I

'And your mother? If you are, then it has to be through her.'
'Jesus Christ, Libor, I was a Gentile five minutes ago, now you're telling
me I can only be Jewish through the right channels. Will you be checking to
see if I'm circumcised next? I don't know about my mother. I can only tell
you she didn't look Jewish.'

'Julian, you don't look Jewish. Forgive me, I don't mean it as an insult,
but you are the least Jewish-looking person I have ever met, and I have met
Swedish  cowboys  and  Eskimo  stuntmen  and  Prussian  film  directors  and

heard.'

Polish Nazis working as set builders in Alaska. I would stake my life on it
that no Jewish gene has been near the gene of a member of your family for
ten thousand years and ten thousand years ago there weren't any Jews. Be
grateful.  A  man  can  live  a  good  and  happy  life  and  not  be  Jewish.'  He
paused. 'Look at Sam Finkler.'

They both laughed wildly and wickedly at this.
'Cruel,'  Treslove  said,  taking  another  drink  and  banging  his  chest.  'But
that  only  serves  my  argument.  These  things  are  not  to  be  decided
superficially. You can be called Finkler and fall short of the mark; or you
can be called Treslove -'

'Which is not exactly a Jewish name -'
'Exactly, and yet still come up to scratch. Wouldn't it have made sense, if
my father didn't want me to know we were Jews, or for anyone else to know
we were Jews for that matter, to have changed our name to the least Jewish
one he could find? Treslove, for Christ's sake. It screams "Not Jewish" at
you. I rest my case.'

'I'll tell how you can rest your case, Mr Perry Mason. You can rest your
case by stopping these ridiculous speculations and asking somebody. Ask
an  uncle,  ask  one  of  your  father's  friends,  ask  anyone  who  knew  your
family. This is a mystery that is solvable with a phone call.'

'No  one  knew  my  family.  We  kept  ourselves  to  ourselves.  I  have  no
uncles. My father had no brothers or sisters, my mother neither. It was what
attracted them to each other. They told me about it. Two orphans, as good
as. Two babes in the wood. You tell me what that's a metaphor for.'

Libor shook his head and topped up their whiskies. 'It's a metaphor for
your not wanting to know the truth because you prefer to make it up. OK,
make it up. You're Jewish. Trog es gezunterhait.' And he raised his glass.

He  sat  down  and  crossed  his  little  feet.  He  had  changed  into  a  pair  of
ancien  regime  slippers  which  bore  his  initials,  woven  in  gold  thread.  A
present from Malkie, Treslove surmised. Wasn't everything a present from
Malkie?  In  these  slippers  Libor  looked  even  more  wispy  and  transparent,
fading  away.  And  yet  to  Treslove  he  was  enviably  secure.  At  home.
Himself.  In  love  still  with  the  only  woman  he  had  ever  loved.  On  his
mantelpiece  photographs  of  the  two  of  them  being  married  by  a  rabbi,
Malkie  veiled,  Libor  in  a  skullcap.  Deep  rooted,  ancient,  knowledgeable
about  themselves.  Musical  because  music  spoke  to  the  romance  of  their
origins.

Looking again in admiration at Libor's slippers he saw that the initials on
one read LS while on the other they read ES. That was right of course; Libor
had changed his own name, in his Hollywood years, from Libor Sevcik to
Egon Slick. It was what Jews did, wasn't it, what Jews had to do? So why
wasn't Libor/Egon more sympathetic to Teitelbaum/Treslove?

He swirled his whisky round in his glass. Bohemian Crystal. His father
too  had  favoured  crystal  whisky  glasses  but  they  had  been  somehow
different. More formal. Probably more expensive. Colder to the lip. That,
essentially, was what the difference amounted to - temperature. Libor and
Malkie  -  even  poor  Malkie  dead  -  were  somehow  warmed  by  their
submersion in a heated past. In comparison, Treslove felt that he had been
brought  up  to  play  on  the  surface  of  life,  like  those  vegetables  that  grow
above ground, where it is chill.

Libor was smiling at him. 'Now you're a Jew, come to dinner,' he said.
'Come to dinner next week - not with Sam - and I'll introduce you to some
people who would be pleased to meet you.'

'You make it sound sinister. Some people. Which people? Watchmen of
the Jewish faith who will scrutinise my credentials? I have no credentials.
And why wouldn't they have been pleased to meet me before I was Jewish?'
'That's good, Julian. Getting touchy is a good sign. You can't be Jewish if

you can't do touchy.'

She's my credentials.'

'I'll tell you what. I'll come if I can bring the woman who attacked me.

Libor shrugged. 'Bring her. Find her and bring her.'
He  made  the  possibility  sound  so  remote  he  could  have  been  talking

about Treslove finding God.

 

Something  that  worried  Treslove  ever  so  slightly  as  he  lay  on  his  bed,
struggling for the thread that would wind him into sleep: Libor's story about
Heifetz at the Royal Albert Hall . . . Wasn't it, in its - he didn't have the
word: its preciousness, its preciosity, its oh-so-Jewish cultural-vulturalness -
wasn't  it  a  bit  uncomfortably  close  to  Libor's  story  about  Malkie  and
Horowitz at the Carnegie?

They could conceivably both be true, but then again, the echo, once one

heard it, was disconcerting.

True or not true, as family mythologies went, these were enviably top-
drawer.  It  wasn't  Elvis  Presley  whom  Malkie  had  called  Maestro.  It  was

Horowitz. As Egon Slick, Libor had put in half a lifetime rubbing shoulders
with the vulgarly famous, and yet when the chips were down, when it was
necessary  to  impress,  he  pulled  his  cards,  without  blushing,  from  another
deck. It wasn't Liza Minnelli or Madonna he was claiming as his cousin - it
was Heifetz. You had to place a high value on intellectual ritziness to want
Horowitz  and  Heifetz  at  your  party.  And  who  did  intellectually  ritzy  as
Finklers did intellectually ritzy?

Yes, you had to hand it to them . . . they were brazen, they had cheek, but

it was cheek predicated on a refined musical education.
Finding his thread, Treslove drifted into a deep sleep.

3

Although  there  had  been  little  commerce  between  the  Finklers  and  the
Tresloves  -  not  counting  the  commerce  between  Tyler  Finkler  and  Julian
Treslove  -  the  Finkler  boys  and  the  Treslove  boys  had  on  occasions  met,
and certainly Alfredo and Rodolfo knew of Finkler well enough through his
books and television to enjoy thinking of him as their famous uncle Sam.
Whether Sam had any interest in thinking of them as his charming nephews
Alf and Ralph was another matter. It was Treslove's suspicion that he didn't
know either of them from Adam.

In  this,  as  in  so  many  other  matters  related  and  indeed  unrelated  to
Finkler, Treslove was wrong. It was Treslove who didn't know either of his
sons from Adam.

Finkler, as it happened, was well aware of his old friend's sons and felt
warmly disposed to them, not impossibly because he was Treslove's rival in
fatherhood and unclehood as well as in everything else, and wanted to be
seen  to  be  making  up  to  the  boys  for  what  their  real  father  hadn't  given
them. Making up to them and giving them a higher standard to judge by.
Alf  was  the  one  he  knew  better,  on  account  of  an  incident  at  the  Grand
Hotel in Eastbourne - the gist of it being that Finkler had calculated on the
Grand being a reliably romantic and discreet place to take a woman for a
Friday night and Saturday morning - seagulls outside the windows and the
other guests being too old to be able to place him or to do anything about it
if  they  had  -  but  he  hadn't  calculated  on  finding  Alf  playing  the  piano
during dinner.

This was two years before Tyler's death, two years before her illness had
been  diagnosed  even,  so  his  misbehaviour  was  not  of  the  utterly
unforgivable sort. Had he only known it, Tyler was herself misbehaving at
the  time,  with  Treslove  as  it  happened,  so  that  too,  weighing  one  thing
against another, took fractionally from his criminality. Even so, to go over
to  the  piano  to  ask  the  pianist  to  play  'Stars  Fell  on  Alabama'  for  Ronit
Kravitz  and  to  discover  he  was  talking  to  Treslove's  son  Alfredo  was  a
misfortune Finkler would rather have avoided.

He didn't register Alfredo immediately - where you don't expect to find
people you don't know well it is easy not to recognise them - but Alfredo,
having  the  advantage  of  seeing  him  frequently  on  television,  recognised
Finkler at once.

'Uncle Sam,' he said. 'Wow!'
Finkler thought about saying 'Do I know you?' but doubted he could put

the words together with any conviction.

'Ahem!'  he  said  instead,  deciding  to  accept  that  he'd  been  caught  red-
handed and to play the naughty uncle about it. Given the incontrovertibility
of Ronit Kravitz's decolletage, there was certainly no point in saying he was
in Eastbourne for a business meeting

Alfredo looked across at the table Finkler had vacated and said, 'Auntie

Tyler couldn't be with you tonight then?'

On the spot, Finkler realised that he had never liked Alfredo. He wouldn't
have sworn that he had ever truly liked Alfredo's father either, but school
friends  are  school  friends.  Alfredo  closely  resembled  his  father,  but  had
turned  himself  into  an  older  version  of  him,  wearing  round  gold-rimmed
glasses which he probably didn't need and plastering his hair into a kind of
greasy cowl that gave him the air of a 1920s Berlin gigolo. Only without the
sex appeal.

'I was going to ask you to play a tune for my companion,' Finkler said,

'but in the circumstances -'

"Happy Birthday to You"?'

'Oh, no, I'll play it,' Alfredo said. 'I'm here for that. What would she like -

For some reason Finkler was unable to ask for the song he had been sent
to ask for. Had he forgotten it in the embarrassment of being found out, or
was he punishing Ronit for being the cause of that embarrassment?

' "My Yiddishe Mama",' he said. 'If you know that.'
'Play it all the time,' Alfredo said.

And he did, more derisively than Finkler had ever heard it played, with
crude  honky-tonk  syncopations  followed  by  absurdly  drawn-out  slow
passages, almost like a fugue, as though it was a mockery of motherhood,
not a celebration of it.

'That's not "Stars Fell on Alabama",' Ronit Kravitz said. Other than her
decolletage, which was bigger than she was, there was little to observe on
Ronit  Kravitz's  person.  Under  the  table  she  wore  high-heeled  shoes  with
diamantes on them, but these were not visible. And though her hair was a
beautiful blue-black, catching light from the chandeliers, it too, like every
eye, fell into the boundless golden chasm which she carried before her as a
proud disabled person carries an infirmity. The Manawatu Gorge was how
Finkler thought of it when he wasn't in love with her, as he wasn't in love
with her now.

'It's his interpretation,' he said. 'I'll hum it to you the way you like it later.'
It  was  a  lesson  he  just  seemed  unable  to  learn:  that  the  company  of
preposterously sexy women always makes a man look a fool. Too long the
legs, too high the skirt, too exposed the breasts, and it's laughter you inspire
as the consort, not envy. For a moment he longed to be at home with Tyler,
until  he  remembered  that  she  was  showing  too  much  of  everything  these
days as well. And she was a mother.

He didn't once wink at Alfredo across the dining room, or take him aside
at the end of the evening and slip a fifty-pound note into the top pocket of
his dinner jacket with a request to, you know, keep this between them. As a
practical  philosopher,  Finkler  was  hot  on  the  etiquette  of  treachery  and
falsehood.  It  was  not  appropriate,  he  thought,  to  strike  up  male  collusion
with  the  child  of  an  old  friend,  let  alone  embroil  him  in  an  older
generation's  way  of  doing  adultery,  laughable  or  otherwise.  He'd  said
'Ahem'. That would have to suffice. But they did run into each other in the
men's lavatory.

'Another  night  at  the  Copacabana  knocked  on  the  head,'  Alfredo  said,
wearily  zipping  himself  up  and  replastering  his  hair  in  the  mirror.  That
done, he popped on a perky pork-pie hat which at a stroke took away all
suggestion of Berlin and made Finkler think of Bermondsey.

His  father's  boy,  all  right,  Finkler  thought,  capable  of  looking  like

everyone and no one.

'You don't like your job?'

'Like it?! You should try playing the piano to people who are here to eat.
Or die. Or both. They're too busy listening to their own stomachs to hear a
note I play. They wouldn't know if I was giving them Chopsticks or Chopin.
I make background noise. Do you know what I do to entertain myself while
I'm  playing?  I  make  up  stories  about  the  diners.  This  one's  screwing  that
one, that one's screwing this one - which is hard to do in a joint like this, I
can  tell  you,  where  most  of  them  won't  have  had  sex  since  before  I  was
born.'

Finkler didn't point out that he was an exception to this rule. 'You hide

your discontent well,' he lied.

playing at Caesar's Palace.'

'Do  I?  That's  because  I  vanish.  I'm  somewhere  else.  In  my  head  I'm

'Well, you hide that well, too.'
'It's a job.'
'We all settle for just a job,' Finkler told him, as though to camera.
'Is that how you see what you do?'
'Mostly, yes.'
'How sad for you, then, as well.'
'As well as for you, you mean?'
'Yes,  as  well  as  for  me,  but  I'm  young.  There's  time  for  anything  to
happen to me. I might make it to Casear's Palace yet. I meant how sad as
well for Dad.'

'Is he unhappy?'
'What  do  you  think?  You've  known  him  like  for  ever.  Does  he  look  a

satisfied man to you?'

'No, but he never did.'
'Didn't he? Never - ha! That figures. I can't imagine him young. He's like

a man who's always been old.'

'Well, there you are,' Finkler said, 'I think of him as a man who's always

been young. All to do with when one meets a person, I guess.'

Under  his  pert  pork-pie  hat,  Alfredo  rolled  his  eyes,  as  though  to  say

Don't go deep on me, Uncle Sam.

What  he  actually  said  was,  'We  don't  hit  it  off  especially  -  I  think  he
secretly prefers my half-brother - but I'm sorry for him, doing that stupid
doubling thing, especially if it all feels to him the way it all feels to me.'

'Oh, come on, at your age the glass is half full.'

'No, it's at your age that the glass is half full. At my age we don't want
half a glass, full or empty. In fact we don't want a glass, end of. We want a
tankard and we want it overflowing. We are the have-everything generation,
remember.'

'No, we're the have-everything generation.'
'Well we're the pissed generation then.'
Finkler  smiled  at  him  and  felt  a  new  book  coming  on.  The  Glass  Half

Empty: Schopenhauer for Teen Binge Drinkers.

It  wasn't  a  cynical  calculation.  Quite  unexpectedly,  he  experienced  a
vicarious  paternal  rush  for  the  boy.  Perhaps  it  was  a  resurfacing  of
something  he  had  felt  for  Treslove  all  those  years  ago.  Perhaps  it  was
usurpation ecstasy - the joy that comes with being a father to someone else's
children - the mirror image of the joyous role Treslove was enjoying that
very  hour  -  being  a  husband  to  someone  else's  wife,  even  if  that  wife
insisted on turning away from him and fiddling with his penis behind her
back,  as  though  having  trouble  with  the  fastening  of  a  complicated
brassiere.

Before  they  left  the  lavatory  together  Finkler  handed  Alfredo  his  card.
'Give me a ring sometime when you're in town,' he said. 'You're not stuck
down here all the time, are you?'

'Shit no. I'd die.'
'Then call me. We can talk about your father . . . or not.'
'Right. Or - I do the Savoy and Claridge's some weeks - you could always

pop in and say hello . . .'

With a floozie, the little bastard means, Finkler thought. That's how he'll
always see me. Out on the razzle with the Manawatu Gorge. And he'll never
let me forget it.

In his mind's eye Finkler saw himself meeting Alfredo in lavatories for
the next fifty years - until Alfredo was far older than he was now and he,
Finkler, had become a bent old man - passing him wads of unused notes in
Manila envelopes.

They shook hands and laughed. Each a little wary and a little flattered.
This boy is an opportunist, Finkler thought, but never mind.
He thinks I think there's some advantage to me in knowing him, Alfredo
thought, and maybe there is. But there's some advantage to him in knowing
me  as  well.  He  might  learn  how  to  choose  himself  a  less  tacky  piece  of
skirt.

 

So  began  a  somehow  compelling  but  mutually  irritating  friendship

between two men of unequal age and interests.

Alfredo had never discussed any of this with his mother or half-brother. He
was a man who liked secrets. But here, when he sat down again after dinner
with them, was a secret he couldn't keep.

'Dad's been mugged. Did you know that?'
'Everyone gets mugged,' Rodolfo said. 'This is London.'
'No but this was a mugging with a difference. This was a mega-mugging.'
'God, is he hurt?' Janice wondered.
'Well here's the thing. Apparently he says no but Uncle Sam thinks yes.'
'You've seen Uncle Sam?'
'Ran into him in a bar. That's how I know about it.'
'Your father would make a fuss about it if he'd been hurt,' Josephine put

in. 'He makes a fuss if he cuts his finger.'

'It's  not  that  kind  of  hurt.  Sam  says  it's  shaken  him  badly  but  he  won't

accept it. He's in denial, Sam reckons.'

'He's  always  been  in  denial,'  Josephine  said.  'He's  in  denial  that  he's  a

bastard.'

'What does Sam think he's in denial about?' Janice asked.
'Hard to say. His identity or whatever.'
Josephine snorted. 'Tell me something new.'
'It's weirder than that. It seems he was mugged by a woman.'
'A woman?' Rodolfo couldn't contain his amusement. 'I knew he was a

wimp, but a woman - !'

'Sounds like some sort of wish-fulfilment,' Janice said.
'Yeah, mine,' Josephine laughed. 'I only wish I could tell you it was me

that did it.'

'Josephine!' Janice admonished her.
'Come off it. Don't tell me you wouldn't want to mug him if you saw him
coming down the street looking like Leonardo DiCaprio's grandfather and
dodging the cracks or whatever he does now?'

'Why don't you come off the fence and tell us what you really think of
Dad?' Rodolfo said, still amused at the idea of his father cowering before a
woman.

'You mean admit I love him?' She put her fingers down her throat.

'Sam says it's bollocks, anyway,' Alfredo said. 'His theory is that Dad's

stressed out.'

'By what?' Janice wanted to know.
'By what happened to Auntie Tyler and the wife of another of his friends.

Too much dying for him to handle, Uncle Sam reckons.'

'That's  your  father  all  over,'  Josephine  said.  'Greedy  little  grave  robber.
Why  can't  he  allow  other  men  to  mourn  their  own  wives?  Why  must  he
always get in on the act?'

'Sam said he was very fond of both women.'
'Yeah - I'll bet. Especially when they snuffed it.'
Ignoring this, Janice said, 'So Sam thinks this mugger materialised from

Julian's grief . . .'

'Grief!'
'No,  it's  an  intriguing  thought.  Maybe  this  is  what  a  ghost  is  -  the
embodiment of what's upsetting you. But why as a mugger, I wonder? Why
the violence?'

'This conversation is getting beyond me,' Rodolfo said. 'Can't we go back

to Dad being bashed by some bag lady?'

'Guilt's  my  guess,'  Josephine  said,  ignoring  him.  'He'd  probably  been

shafting them both. Or worse, singing Puccini arias to them.'

'Yours were Verdi,' Janice reminded her.
'Anyway,' Alfredo went on, 'Sam suggested we send him away for a bit.'
'To the loony bin?'
'Arrange a holiday for him. You know how reluctant he is to make plans
to  go  away.  Frightened  of  trains,  frightened  of  planes,  frightened  to  be
somewhere  he  doesn't  know  the  local  word  for  paracetamol.  It  would  be
best, Uncle Sam said, for us actually to go with him. Anyone want to go on
holiday with Dad?'

'Not me,' Rodolfo said.
'Not me,' Janice said.
'Not  if  he  was  the  last  man  on  the  planet,'  Josephine  said.  'Let  Sam

Finkler go with him if he thinks it's such a good idea.'

'So that's a no then, is it?' Alfredo laughed.
It was only as they were getting up to leave again, having agreed that the
boys should at least give him a call and maybe take him out for lunch, that
Alfredo remembered something else Uncle Sam had told him. 'And, and . . .
he's decided he's a Jew.'

'Uncle Sam? Isn't Uncle Sam already a Jew?'
'No, Dad. Dad's decided he's a Jew.'
'Dad's decided he's a Jew? Dad, a Jew?'
All four sat down again.
'Yep.'
'How do you mean decided?' Rodolfo wanted to know. 'You can't just get

up one morning and decide you're a Jew - or can you?'

'I've  worked  with  a  lot  of  people  at  BH  who  got  up  one  morning  and

decided they were not a Jew,' Josephine said.

'But it can't work the other way, surely?'
'Search me,' said Alfredo. 'But I don't think Dad's planning to become a
Jew.  If  I  understood  Uncle  Sam  he's  got  this  bee  in  his  bonnet  that  he
already is a Jew.'

'Christ,' Rodolfo said, 'what does that make us?'
'Not Jewish,' Josephine said. 'Don't worry about it. Jews don't trust their
women in the sack, so you can only be Jewish through the vagina. And I
don't have a Jewish vagina.'

'Nor me,' Janice said. 'Nor mine.'
Alfredo and Rodolfo exchanged vomit faces with each other.
But  Rodolfo  was  perplexed  as  well  as  nauseated.  'I  don't  get  how  that
works. If you can't trust your women why would you want them to be the
ones that make you Jewish?'

'Well, you wouldn't be a Jew at all if you relied on your father and he was

a bloody big Arab with gold teeth.'

'Do Jewish women sleep with Arabs?'
'Darling, Jewish women sleep with anybody.'
'Hush it,' Janice said, signalling the waiters with a mute revolution of her
head.  They  were,  don't  forget  -  her  eyes  warned  them  -  in  a  Lebanese
restaurant.

'Interesting,  though,'  Rodolfo  said.  'If  I  discover  I'm  half  Jewish  will  I

suddenly become half clever?'

Janice ruffled her son's hair. 'You don't need him to make you half clever,'

she said.

'Half rich, then?'

FIVE

1

You don't say 'Find her and bring her' to an obsessive man.

But  Treslove  was  damned  if  he  was  going  to  give  the  'her'  in  question
another  minute  of  his  time.  One  day  you  just  have  to  say  no  to  a
compulsion. He put on a coat and took it off again. Enough was enough. He
knew  what  he  thought.  He  knew  what  he  had  heard.  You  Jew.  Not  You
Bloody Jew or You Dirty Jew or You Lovely Jew. Just You Jew. And it was
the  oddity  of  that,  all  things  considered,  that  proved  that  she  had  said  it.
Why would he make up anything so strange? You Jew, unvarnished - You
pure unvarnished Jew - supported no theory or assumption. It answered to
no  necessity  that  Treslove  recognised  in  himself.  It  provided  nothing,
solved nothing, assuaged nothing.

Treslove knew the argument against. He had made it up out of need. So

show him the need?

Its  very  arbitrariness  was  the  proof  of  its  authenticity.  His  psychology
was  innocent  of  seeking  or  finding  the  slightest  gratification  from  it.  But
that still left the mugger. Would she have called him Jew just for the fun of
it? No, she had called him Jew because she'd seen a Jew. Why she needed to
tell  him  what  she'd  seen  was  a  different  question.  She  didn't,  all  things
considered, have to say anything. She could have taken his valuables and
left without a word. He wasn't exactly putting up a fight. Or looking for a
thank-you.  Most  muggers,  he  assumed,  didn't  identify  their  victims  while
they were mugging them. You Protestant, You Chinaman. Why bother? The
Protestant  and  the  Chinaman  could  be  relied  on  to  know  what  they  were
without  a  mugger  telling  them.  So  You  Jew  was  either  an  expression  of
irrepressible  rage  or  it  was  intended  to  be  informative.  I've  taken  your
watch,  your  wallet,  your  fountain  pen,  your  mobile  phone  and  your  self-
respect - your jewels, in short - but in return I give you something: just in
case you didn't know it, and I have a sneaking little feeling (don't ask me
why) that you might not have known it, you're a Jew.

Bye.

Treslove was not willing to accept that he had encountered a person with
a screw loose, or that he had just happened to be in the wrong place at the
wrong time. He'd been subject to enough accident. His whole life had been
an accident. His birth was an accident - his parents had told him that, 'You
weren't  planned,  Julian,  but  you  were  a  nice  surprise.'  His  own  sons  the
same. Only he'd never told them they were a nice surprise. Doing a modular
degree  had  been  an  accident;  in  another  age  he'd  have  read  classics  or
theology. The BBC was an accident. A malign accident. The women he'd
loved were all accidents. If life didn't have a thread of meaning to it, why
live it? Some men find God where they least expect to. Some discover their
purpose in social action or self-sacrifice. Treslove had been in waiting for
as long as he could remember. Very well then. My fate cries out, he thought.

Two nights later he was dining with fellow Jews at Libor's place.

2

Half a year before his wife died, Sam Finkler accepted an invitation to be a
castaway on Desert Island Discs.

It  would  be  cruel  to  assume  that  the  two  events  were  anything  but

coincidentally related.

They were sitting in their garden, only a low gate dividing them from the
Heath, when Finkler first brought up the invitation. It was that or help Tyler
plant. Their garden had long been designated an area of non-relaxation on
account  of  Tyler  always  being  busy  in  it  and  Finkler  having  an  allergic
reaction to lawns, flowers and the idea of taking things easy. 'That's called a
lounger - lounge!' Tyler used to order him. But she had discovered what he
had always known - that his body wasn't built for lounging in a lounger. 'I'll
lounge long enough in due course,' had been his answer. So either he didn't
venture out into the garden at all, or he paced around its perimeter like a
private detective looking for a corpse in the bushes, pausing to discuss what
was on his mind, and that - at least the part he could relate to Tyler - was
invariably work. The moment he dried up or slowed down he knew Tyler
would recruit him to hold a bamboo stake for her, or to put his finger on a
knot  of  green  string.  Not  onerous  tasks  in  themselves,  but  they  made
Finkler feel his life was ebbing away into manure and mulch.

'I've landed Desert Island Discs,' he told her from the garden's furthest

extremity, his hands behind him holding on to a down-pipe for safety.

Tyler  was  on  her  hands  and  knees,  coaxing  life  out  of  the  stony  soil.
Absorbed in dirt. She didn't look up. 'Landed? How do you mean landed? I
didn't know you were fishing for it.'

'I wasn't. They fished for me.'
'Then tell them to throw you back.'
'Why would I do that?'
'Why wouldn't you? What do you want with Desert Island Discs? For a
start you go to pieces in a garden never mind a desert island. And you've
never owned a disc. You don't know any music.'

'I do.'
'Name some music that you like.'
'Ah, like - that's not the same as know.'
'Pedantic sod!' she said. 'It's not enough you're a liar. You have to be a
pedant as well. I recommend you don't do the programme. It will do you no
favours. People can tell when you're making it up. You shout.'

Finkler might have been fished for, but he did not rise to his wife's bait. 'I

won't be lying. Not every one of my records has to be music.'

'So  what  are  you  going  to  choose  -  Bertrand  Russell  reading  his

memoirs? I can't wait.'

She stood up and wiped her hands on the gardener's apron he had bought
her years ago. She was wearing earrings he had bought her, too. And the
gold  Rolex  he  had  given  her  on  their  tenth  wedding  anniversary.  Tyler
gardened  fully  made-up  and  in  her  jewellery.  She  could  have  gone  from
spreading fertiliser to dining at the Ritz without needing to do anything but
peel  off  her  gloves  and  run  her  fingers  through  her  hair.  The  sight  of  his
wife  rising  from  the  compost  like  a  beau-monde  Venus  was  the  reason
Finkler couldn't keep out of the garden no matter how much he feared it. It
was a mystery to him why he bothered to have mistresses when he found
his wife so much more desirable than any of them.

Was he a bad man or just a foolish one? He didn't feel bad to himself. As
a  husband  he  believed  himself  to  be  essentially  good  and  loyal.  It  just
wasn't written in a man's nature to be monogamous, that was all. And he
owed something to his nature even when his nature was at odds with his
desire, which was to stay home and cherish his wife.

It was his nature - all nature, the rule of nature - that was the bastard, not

him.

'Well, to begin with,' he said, feeling sentimental, 'I thought of the music

we had at our wedding . . .'

She walked over to the tap to turn on the hose. 'Mendelssohn's "Wedding
March"?  Not  exactly  original.  And  I'd  prefer,  if  you  don't  mind,  that  you
kept our wedding out of it, since it's the last thing you'll be thinking about
on your desert island. If Mendelssohn is the best you can come up with, my
advice  is  to  tell  them  you're  too  busy.  Unless  he  wrote  an  "Adultery
March".'

'Too busy for Desert Island Discs? No one's too busy for Desert Island

Discs. It's one of those offers you have to grab - it's a career thing.'

'You have a career. Grab the end of the hose for me instead.'
Finkler  was  not  able  to  determine  where  the  end  of  the  hose  was  and
began to stalk his garden like a private detective again, staring into bushes
and scratching his head.

'It's  the  bit  with  the  water  coming  out,  you  imbecile.  How  many  years
have you lived here? - and you still don't know where your own hosepipe is.
Ha!' She laughed at her joke. He didn't.

'You  can't  be  seen  not  to  be  asked  to  do  Desert  Island  Discs,'  he
continued, finding the hose at last and then wondering what he was meant
to do with it.

'You've been asked. They've asked you. Why can't you be seen to refuse?
I'd have thought that would do your career no end of good. Prove you're not
pushy. Give it here.'

'Not pushy?'
'Not eager. Not desperate.'
'You said pushy.'
'And?'
'Not a pushy Jew, you mean?'
'Oh, for God's sake. That's not at all what I meant and you know it. Pushy
Jew is your own projection. If that's how you fear people see you that's your
problem, not mine. I think you're just pushy full stop. Anyway, I'm the Jew
in this relationship, remember.'

'That's nonsense and you know it.'
'Recite the Amidah, then. Tell me one of the Eighteen Blessings . . .'
Finkler looked away.
Once upon a time she might have thought about spraying him with water,
knowing that he would spray her back and they would have a hose fight in

the garden, ending in laughter or even lovemaking on the grass and bugger
the neighbours. But they were past that . . .

. . . assuming it had ever happened. She tried to picture him chasing her
and catching her, pressing his mouth to hers, and was alarmed to realise she
was unable to.

 

He canvassed his friends. Not for their opinion as to whether he should do it
or not. He knew he had to do it. But for music to lie on a desert island to.
Libor  suggested  Schubert's  Impromptus.  And  some  fiddle  concertos.
Treslove wrote him down the names of the great death arias in Italian opera.
'How many do you need?' he asked. 'Six?'

'One's fine. They want variety.'
'I've  given  you  six  to  be  on  the  safe  side.  They're  all  very  different.
Sometimes  it's  the  woman  who's  dying,  sometimes  it's  the  man.  And  I've
even  thrown  in  one  in  which  they  die  together.  Make  a  great  end  to  the
programme.'

And to my career, Finkler thought.
At  last,  though  not  without  canvassing  Alfredo  as  well,  Finkler  trusted
his own instincts for populism and chose Bob Dylan, Queen, Pink Floyd,
Felix  Mendelssohn  (going  for  Libor's  suggestion  of  the  Violin  Concerto
rather than the 'Wedding March'), Girls Aloud, a tranche of obvious Elgar,
Bertrand Russell reading from his memoirs, and Bruce Springsteen, whom
he  referred  to  on  the  show  as  the  Boss.  For  his  book  he  picked  the
Dialogues of Plato but also wondered if they would bend the rules this once
and let him take along the complete Harry Potter as well.

'As light relief from all that seriousness?' the presenter asked.
'No, that's the Plato,' Finkler said. Joking, of course, but also meaning it

for those who wanted him to mean it.

To prove to his wife that she was not the only Jew in their marriage he
made much of going to the synagogue every morning with his father and
listening to him saying prayers for his parents, great searing lamentations
that  moved  and,  yes,  marked  him  deeply.  Yisgadal  viyiskadash  .  .  .  the
ancient language of the Hebrew tolling for the dead. May His great Name
grow exalted and sanctified. A prayer which he in turn said when he was
orphaned.  The  rationalist  philosopher  acknowledging  God  in  the  face  of
truths that reason could never hope to penetrate. You could hear, he thought,
a  pin  drop  in  the  studio.  His  Jewishness  had  always  been  immeasurably

'How couldn't I?'
'Because  that  wasn't  what  the  programme  was  about,  that's  how  you

couldn't. Because no one was asking.'

'Tyler . . .'
'I  know  -  your  conscience  made  you.  A  convenient  entity  your
conscience. There when you need it, not when you don't. Well, I'm ashamed
of your public display of shame and I'm not even Jewish.'

'That's precisely why,' Finkler said.
 

important to him, he confided, a matter of daily solace and inspiration, but
he  couldn't  stay  silent  about  the  dispossession  of  the  Palestinians.  'In  the
matter of Palestine,' he went on, with a falter in his voice, 'I am profoundly
ashamed.'

'Profoundly  self-important  you  mean,'  Tyler  said  when  she  heard  the

programme. 'How could you?'

Finkler  was  disappointed  that  none  of  his  wittily  glossed  selections  made
Pick  of  the  Week  but  was  flattered  to  receive  a  letter,  a  fortnight  after
transmission, from a number of well-known theatrical and academic Jews
inviting him to join a group which had been no more than an idea without
direction so far but which they now intended to reform and name in honour
of his courage in speaking out - Ashamed Jews.

Finkler was moved. Praise from his peers affected him almost as deeply
as  the  prayers  he  had  never  said  for  his  grandfather.  He  scanned  the  list.
Most of the professors he knew already and didn't care about, but the actors
represented a new scaling of the heights of fame. Though he had never been
much of a theatregoer and turned his nose up at most of Tyler's let's-go-and-
see-a-play suggestions, he viewed being written to by actors - even actors
he didn't think very highly of qua actors - in a different light. There was a
celebrity chef on the list too, and a couple of stellar stand-up comedians.
'Jesus!' Finkler said when he got the letter.

Tyler was in the garden, lounging this time. A coffee cup in her hand, the
papers  open.  She  had  been  sleeping  though  it  was  only  late  morning.
Finkler had not noticed that she tired more quickly than she used to.

'Jesus!' he repeated, so that she should hear him.
She didn't stir. 'Someone suing you for breach of promise, dearest?'
'Not everyone, it seems, was ashamed of me,' he said, naming the most

eminent signatories to the letter. Slowly. One by one.

'And?'
She took as long over the one word as her husband had taken over the

dozen names.

He flared his nostrils at her. 'What do you mean "and"?'
She sat up and looked at him. 'Samuel, there is not a person whose name
you  have  just  read  out  for  whom  you  have  the  slightest  regard.  You
abominate  academics.  You  don't  like  actors  -  you  particularly  don't  like
those  actors  -  you  have  no  time  for  celebrity  chefs  and  you  can't  abide
stand-up comedians, especially those stand-up comedians. Not funny, you
say about them. Seriously not funny. Why would I - no, why would you care
what any of them think?'

'My judgement of them as performers is hardly pertinent in this instance,

Tyler.'

'So  what  is?  Your  judgement  of  them  as  political  analysts?  Historians?
Theologians? Moral philosophers? I don't recall your ever saying to me that
though they were shit as comedians you thought them profound as thinkers.
Every  time  you've  worked  with  actors  you've  pronounced  them  to  be
cretins, incapable of putting a single sentence together or expressing half a
thought.  And  certainly  unable  to  understand  yours.  What's  changed,
Samuel?'

'It's pleasing to receive support.'
'From anywhere? From anyone?'
'I wouldn't call these people anyone.'
'No, in your own words less than anyone. Except they're someone now

they're praising you.'

He knew he could not read her the whole letter, could not tell her that his
'courage' had inspired or at least revitalised a movement - small now, but
capable of growing to who could say what size - could not say that it was
nice to be appreciated, Tyler, so fuck you.
Yet still he could not leave her presence.
So  he  kept  it  brief.  'Praise  is  different  when  it's  your  own  who  are

praising you.'

them open.

She  closed  her  eyes.  She  could  read  his  mind  without  having  to  keep

'Jesus fucking Christ, Shmuelly,' she said. 'Your own! Have you forgotten
that you don't like Jews? You shun the company of Jews. You have publicly
proclaimed  yourself  disgusted  by  Jews  because  they  throw  their  weight

around  and  then  tell  you  they  believe  in  a  compassionate  God.  And  now
because a few mediocre half-household-name Jews have decided to come
out and agree with you, you're mad for them. Was that all it ever needed?
Would you have been the goodest of all good Jewish boys if only the other
Jewish  boys  had  loved  you  earlier?  I  don't  get  it.  It  makes  no  sense.
Becoming an enthusiastic Jew again in order to turn on Judaism.'

'It's not Judaism I'm turning on.'
'Well, it's sure as hell not Christianity. Ashamed Jews? It would be more
honourable  of  you  to  kick  around  with  David  Irving  or  join  the  BNP.
Remember  what  it  is  you  really  want,  Samuel  .  .  .  Sam!  And  what  you
really want isn't the attention of Jews. There aren't enough of them.'

He didn't listen to her. He went upstairs to his desk, his ears ringing, and
wrote a letter of appreciation to Ashamed Jews - a letter in appreciation of
their appreciation. He was honoured to join them.

But might he make a suggestion? In the age of sound bites, which, like it
or not, this assuredly was, one simple, easy to remember acronym could do
the work of a thousand manifestos. Well, an acronym - or something much
like  an  acronym  -  lay  concealed  in  the  very  name  the  group  had  already
given itself. Instead of 'Ashamed Jews', what about 'ASHamed Jews', which
might or might not, depending on how others felt, be shortened now or in
the future to ASH, the peculiar felicity of which, in the circumstances, he
was sure it wasn't necessary for him to point out?

Within a week he received an enthusiastic response on notepaper headed

'ASHamed Jews'.

He felt a deep sense of pride, mitigated, of course, by sadness on behalf

of those whose suffering had made ASHamed Jews necessary.

Tyler was cruelly wrong about him. He didn't want what she accused him
of  wanting.  His  hunger  for  acclaim  -  or  even  for  approval  -  was  not  that
voracious. As God was his witness, he felt approved of enough. This wasn't
about acceptance. It was about the truth. Someone had to speak it. And now
others were ready to speak it with him. And in his name.

Had Ronit Kravitz not been the daughter of an Israyeli general he'd have
rung  her  to  propose  a  weekend  of  making  ASHamed  Jew  whoopee  in
Eastbourne.

3

Tyler  did,  as  it  turned  out,  watch  a  second  of  her  husband's  television
programmes in Treslove's Hampstead apartment that wasn't in Hampstead.
And, at decent intervals, further series after that. She saw it as a consolation
for  her  husband  doing  so  much  television.  The  thing  she  and  Julian  had
going never blossomed into an affair. Neither was looking for an affair - or
at least Tyler wasn't and Treslove had grown wary of looking for anything -
but they found a way of showing kindnesses to each other over and above
the conventions of an afternoon adultery fuelled by anger and envy.

Her growing tired was not lost on Treslove.
'You look pale,' he told her once, smothering her face with kisses.
She submitted to them, laughing. Her quiet, not her raucous laugh.
'And you are subdued somehow,' he said, kissing her again.
'I'm sorry,' she said. 'I didn't come round to depress you.'
'You don't depress me. Your pallor becomes you. I like a woman to look

tragic.'

'God - tragic now. Is it as bad as that?'
It was as bad as that, yes.
Treslove  would  have  said  Come  and  die  at  my  place  but  he  knew  he
couldn't.  A  woman  must  die  in  her  own  home  and  in  her  own  husband's
arms, no matter that her lover would mop her brow with more consideration
than the husband ever could.

'I do love you, you know,' he told her on what they both in their hearts
suspected would be their last tryst. He had told her he loved her the first
time they slept together, watching Sam on the box. But this time he meant
it. Not that he didn't mean it then. But this time he meant it differently. This
time he meant it for her.

'Don't be silly,' she told him.
'I do.'
'You don't.'
'I truly do.'
'You  truly  don't,  but  I  am  touched  by  your  wanting  to.  You  have  been
lovely to me. I am under no illusions, Julian. I get men. I know the bizarre
way masculine friendship works. I have never fooled myself that I am any
different to other wives in this position - a means for you two to work out
your rivalry. I told you that at the beginning. But I've been happy to take
advantage of that for my own purposes. And I thank you for having made
me feel it was me you wanted.'

'It was you I wanted.'
'I believe it was. But not as much as you wanted Samuel.'
Treslove was horrified. 'I, want Sam?'
'Oh,  not  in  the  wanting  to  fuck  him  sense.  I've  never  loved  him  in  the
wanting to fuck him sense. I doubt anybody has. He's not a fuckable man.
Not  that  that's  ever  stopped  him  .  .  .  or  them.  But  he  has  something,  my
husband,  not  a  glow  exactly,  but  some  air  of  secrecy  that  you  want  to
penetrate, a kind of fast-track competence or know-how that you would like
to have rub off on you. He is one of those Jews to whom, in an another age,
even the most avidly Jew-hating emperor or sultan would have given high
office. He appears connected, he knows how to get on, and you feel that if
you are close to him he will get on for the both of you. But I don't have to
tell you. You feel it. I know you feel it.'

'Well, I didn't know I felt it.'
'Trust me, you feel it. And that's where I come in. I'm the bit that rubs off

on you. Through me you connect to him.'

'Tyler -'
'It's all right. I don't mind being the stolen stardust that sprinkles you with
second-hand importance. I get my revenge on him and at the same time get
to feel more cared for by you.'

She kissed him. A thank-you kiss.
The kiss, Treslove thought, that a woman gives a man who doesn't shake
her to her soul. For that was what his 'caring' for her denoted - that he was
kind but not challenging, not a man of influence, not someone who gave her
access to the fast track. Yes, she came round to his house, slid with angular
infidelity  into  his  bed  and  fucked  him,  but  without  ever  truly  noticing  he
was  there.  Even  this  kiss  somehow  glanced  by  him,  as  though  she  were
really kissing a man standing in the room behind.

Was it true, what she had said? That sleeping with Sam's wife gave him
temporary honorary entry to Sam's success? If it was true, why then didn't
he  feel  more  successful?  He  liked  the  idea  of  Sam  being  an  unfuckable
man,  but  what  was  that  information  worth  if  he  was  an  unfuckable  man
himself. Poor Tyler, fucking two unfuckable men. No wonder she looked ill.

But poor me as well, Treslove thought.
A means to work out their rivalry, she had called herself. Their rivalry -
implying that there was something in this for Sam too. Did that mean he
knew? Was it possible that when she got home Tyler would tell her husband

what an unfuckable man his friend was? And would Sam get off on that?
Would they get off on it together?

Did Finklers do that?
For  the  first  time,  Treslove  broke  the  rule  all  adulterers  must  obey  or
perish,  and  pictured  them  in  bed  together.  Tyler,  fresh  from  Treslove,
turning  to  her  husband  smiling,  facing  him  as  she  had  never  once  faced
Treslove,  holding  his  penis  in  front  of  her  like  a  bridal  bouquet,  not  a
problem to be solved behind her back like Treslove's. Looking at it even,
perhaps  giving  it  name,  confronting  it  head-on,  admiring  it,  as  she  had
never once confronted and admired his.

'In the meantime,' she said, looking at her watch, though she didn't mean

He said nothing.
'Anyway, that was where he came out with it.'
'Came out with what?'
'His confession of shame.'
'Shame about Ronit?'
'Shame about Israel, you fool.'
'Oh, that. I've heard him on the subject with Libor. It's nothing new.'

'this minute', 'he's got himself a new craze.'
Did Treslove care? 'What?' he wondered.
She  waved  the  subject  away  as  though,  now  he  asked,  she  wished  she
hadn't brought it up, or as though she felt he would never understand the ins
and outs of it.

'Oh, this Israel business. Sorry, Palestine, as he insists on calling it.'
'I know. I've heard him.'
'You heard him on Desert Island Discs?'
'Missed  it,'  Treslove  lied.  He  hadn't  missed  it.  He  had  gone  to  great
lengths not to hear it or to be in contact with anyone who had. Watching
Finkler on television while sleeping with his wife was one thing, but Desert
Island Discs to which the whole country tuned in . . .

'Wise  move.  I  wish  I'd  missed  it.  In  fact  I'd  have  come  round  here  in
order to miss it but he wanted me to listen to it with him. Which should
have made me suspicious. How come no Ronit . . .?'

Again Treslove found himself thinking of Tyler and Sam in bed together,
face to face, listening to Desert Island Discs, Tyler admiring Sam's penis,
crooning over it while on the radio the man himself did his Palestine thing.

'It's new to announce it to the country. Do you know how many people

listen to that programme?'

Treslove  had  a  fair  idea  but  didn't  want  to  get  into  a  discussion  about
numbers. Mention of millions hurt Treslove's ear. 'So does he regret it now?'
'Regret it! He's like the cat that got the cream. He has a whole new bunch
of  friends.  The  ASHamed  Jews.  They're  a  bit  like  the  Lost  Boys.  It's  all
down to careless mothering if you ask me.'

Treslove laughed. Partly in appreciation of Tyler's joke, partly to dispel

the idea of Finkler having new friends. 'Does he know you call them that?'

'The Lost Boys?'
'No, the ASHamed Jews.'
'Oh,  they're  not  my  invention.  They  call  themselves  that.  They're  a
movement, inspired, would you believe, by my hubby. They write letters to
the papers.'

'As ASHamed Jews?'
'As ASHamed Jews.'
'That's a bit disempowering, isn't it?'
'How do you mean?'
'Well,  to  make  your  shame  your  platform.  Reminds  me  of  the  Ellen

Jamesians.'

'Haven't  heard  of  them.  Are  they  anti-Zionists  too?  Don't  tell  Sam.  If

they're anti-Zionist and women he'll join in a shot.'

'They're  the  deranged  feminists  in  The  World  According  to  Garp.  John
Irving - no? Garrulous American novelist. Wrestler. Writes a bit like one. I
made one of my first radio programmes about the Ellen Jamesians. They cut
out  their  tongues  in  solidarity  with  a  young  woman  who  was  raped  and
mutilated.  Something  of  a  self-defeating  action,  since  they  couldn't
thereafter effectively voice their anger. A good anti-feminist joke, I always
thought, not that I'm, you know -'

'Well. I doubt there'll be any tongue cutting with this lot. They're a gobby
bunch, used to the limelight and the sound of their own voices. Sam's on the
phone to them every minute God sends. And then there are the meetings.'

'They have meetings?'
'Not public ones, as far as I know. Not yet, anyway. But they meet at one
another's  houses.  Sounds  disgusting  to  me.  Like  group  confessionals.
Forgive  me,  Father,  for  I  have  sinned.  Sam's  their  father  confessor.  "I

forgive you, my child. Say three I am ashameds and don't go to Eilat for
your holidays." I won't allow them in my house.'

'And is that all they stand for - being ashamed of being Jewish?'
'Whoa!' She laid a hand on his arm. 'You're not allowed to say that. It's

not Jews they're ashamed of being. It's Israel. Palestine. Whatever.'

'So are they Israelis?'
'You know Sam is not an Israeli. He won't even go there.'
'I meant the others.'
'I  don't  know  about  all  of  them,  but  they're  actors  and  comedians  and

those I've heard of certainly aren't Israelis.'

'So  how  can  they  be  ashamed?  How  can  you  be  ashamed  of  a  country

that's not yours?' Treslove truly was puzzled.

'It's because they're Jewish.'
'But you said they're not ashamed of being Jewish.'
'Exactly. But they're ashamed as Jews.'
'Ashamed as Jews of a country of which they are not citizens . . .?'
Tyler laid a hand on his arm again. 'Look,' she said, 'what do we know? I

think you've got to be one to get it.'

'Be one what? One of the ASHamed?'
'A Jew. You've got to be a Jew to get why you're ashamed of being a Jew.'
'I always forget that you're not.'
'Well, I'm not. Except by adoption and hard work.'
'But at least that way you're not ashamed.'
'Indeed I'm not. If anything I'm rather proud. Though not of my husband.

Of him I'm ashamed.'

'So you're both ashamed.'
'Yes,  but  of  different  things.  He's  ashamed  because  he's  a  Jew,  I'm

ashamed because he's not.'

'And the kids?'
Tyler  became  abrupt.  'They're  at  university,  Julian,  remember.  Which
means  they're  old  enough  to  make  up  their  own  minds  .  .  .  but  I  haven't
brought  them  up  Jewish  only  to  be  ashamed.'  She  laughed  at  her  own
words. 'Listen to me - brought them up Jewish.'
Treslove wanted to tell her he loved her again.
'And?' he asked.
'And what?'
'And what are they?'

be ashamed,' she said.

'Oh, I am, don't worry. I am ashamed of most things though none of them

have anything to do with Jews. Unless I should be ashamed of us.'

'One is, one isn't, one's not sure.'
'You have three?'
She pretended to hit him, but with little force. 'You're the one who should

She exchanged a long look with him, a look that spoke of the past, not
the future. 'Don't you get sick of us?' she said, as though wanting to change
the  subject.  'I  don't  mean  us  us,  I  mean  Jews.  Don't  you  get  sick  of  our,
their, self-preoccupation?'
'I never get sick of you.'
'Stop it. Answer me - don't you wish they'd shut up about themselves?'
'ASHamed Jews?'
'All  Jews.  Endlessly  falling  out  in  public  about  how  Jewish  to  be,
whether  they  are  or  they  aren't,  whether  they're  practising  or  they're  not,
whether  to  wear  fringes  or  eat  bacon,  whether  they  feel  safe  here  or
precarious,  whether  the  world  hates  them  or  it  doesn't,  the  fucking
Holocaust, fucking Palestine . . .'

'No.  Can't  say  I  notice.  Sam,  maybe,  yes.  I  always  feel  when  he  talks
about Palestine that he's paying his parents back for something. It reminds
me of swearing for the first time when you're a kid - daring God to strike
you  down.  And  wanting  to  show  you  belong  to  the  kids  who  already  do
swear. But I don't understand the politics. Only that if anyone's going to be
ashamed then maybe we all should be.'

'Exactly.  The  arrogance  of  them  -  ASHamed  Jews  for  God's  sake,  as
though the world waits upon the findings of their consciences. That's what
shames me -'

'As a Jewess.'
'I've warned you about that word.'
'I know,' said Treslove, 'but I get hot saying it.'
'Well, you mustn't.'
'My Jewess,' he said, 'my unashamed Jewess that isn't,' and took her to
him and held her. She felt smaller in his arms than when he'd first tried to
hold her a year ago or more. There was less spring in her flesh, he thought.
And her clothes were less sharp. Literally sharp. He bled when he first held
her. There was anger in her still, but no fight. That she would consent to

enter his arms at all, let alone be still in them, proved her alteration. The
less of her there was, the more of her was his.

'I meant it,' he said, 'I truly do love you.'
'And I meant it when I thanked you for your kindness.'
For a moment it seemed to Treslove that they were the outsiders, just the
two of them in the darkness, excluded from the pack of others. Today he
didn't want her to go home, back to Sam's bed, back to Sam's penis. Was
Sam now ashamed of his penis, too? Treslove wondered.

He  had  flaunted  his  circumcision  at  school.  'Women  love  it,'  he'd  told

Treslove in the shower room.

'Liar.'
'I'm not. It's true.'
'How do you know?'
'I've read. It gives them greater satisfaction. With one of these beauties

you can go for ever.'

Treslove read up about it himself. 'You don't get the pleasure I get,' he

told his friend. 'You've lost the most sensitive part.'

'It  might  be  sensitive  but  it's  horrible.  No  woman  will  want  to  touch
yours. So what's the sensitivity worth? Unless you want to spend the rest of
your life being sensitive with yourself.'

'You'll never experience what I experience.'
'With that thing you'll never experience anything.'
'We'll see.'
'We'll see.'
And now? Did Finkler's Jewish shame extend to his Jewish dick?
Or  was  his  dick  the  one  part  of  him  to  enjoy  exclusion  from  the  slur?
Could an ASHamed Jew go on giving women greater satisfaction than an
unashamed Gentile, Palestine or no Palestine?

That's if there'd ever been a grain of truth in any of it. You never knew
with Jews what was a joke and what wasn't, and Finkler wasn't even a Jew
who joked much. Treslove longed for Tyler to tell him. Solve the mystery
once  and  for  all.  Did  women  have  a  preference?  She  was  in  the  best
position  to  make  the  comparison.  Yes  or  no?  Could  her  Shmuelly  go  for
ever? Was her willingness to look at her husband's penis but not her lover's
attributable to the foreskin and the foreskin alone? Was Treslove uncut too
ugly to look at? Had the Jews got that one right at least?

It would explain, wouldn't it, why she fiddled with him the way she did,

behind his back. Was she unconsciously trying to screw off his prepuce?

He  didn't  ask  her.  Didn't  have  the  courage.  And  in  all  likelihood  didn't
want  to  hear  the  answer.  Besides,  Tyler  wasn't  well  enough  to  be
questioned.

You take your opportunity when you have it. Treslove was never given

another.

4

'So where is she?' Libor asked, opening the door to Treslove. Normally he
would have buzzed his friend in, but this time he came down in the lift. He
wanted  a  private  introduction  to  the  mystery  mugger  who  could  smell  a
man's religion on him.

Treslove showed Libor the palms of his hands. Empty. Then pointed to

his heart. 'In here,' he said.

Libor pointed to his friend's head. 'You sure she's not in there?'
'I can always leave.'
'And get attacked again? Don't leave. Come and meet the other guests.

And by the way, we're having a Seder.'

'What's a Seder?'
'A Passover service.'
'I'll come back.'
'Don't  be  silly.  You'll  enjoy  it.  Everyone  enjoys  a  Seder.  There's  even

singing.'

'I'll come back.'
'You'll  come  up.  It's  an  interesting  gathering.  Old,  but  interesting.  And
God is meant to be present. Or at least his Angel. We pour a glass of wine
for him.'

'Is that why you're dressed formally? To greet the Angel?'
Libor was wearing a grey suit with a grey stripe in it and a grey lawyer's
tie.  The  overall  greyness  made  his  face  all  but  disappear.  Treslove
pretended to look down into his jacket to see where he had gone.

Libor nodded. 'You aren't surprised?'
'By your suit? Yes. Particularly by the fact that your trousers reach your

shoes.'

'I'm getting shorter, that's all that means. Thank you for noticing. But I

meant aren't you surprised by our having a Seder in September?'

'Why? When should you be having a Seder?'
Libor  looked  at  him  sideways,  as  it  to  say,  So  much  for  your  being

Jewish. 'March, April - about the time you have Easter. It's a moon thing.'

'So why are you having it early? For me?'
'We're not having it early, we're having it late. I have a dying great-great-
great-somebody or other. Hard to credit, I know. She must be a hundred and
forty. She's Malkie's side of the family. She was indisposed for this year's
Seder and doubts she'll survive to see another. So we're making her one last
one before she goes.'

Treslove  touched  Libor's  grey  sleeve.  The  idea  of  one  last  anything

always upset him. 'And you can do that?'

left.'

'By a rabbi, maybe not. But by me it's immaterial. You have one when

you feel like one. It might be my last as well.'

Treslove ignored that. 'Will I follow it?'
'Some of it. We're doing the speeded-up version. Quick, while there's life

So  as  the  old  lady  nodded  through  the  last  Seder  of  her  life,  Treslove,
bowing to the assembled guests but being quiet about it, took a chair at his
first.
 

He knew the story. Who doesn't know the story? Treslove knew it because
he had sung in Handel's Israel in Egypt at school, an unnecessarily lavish
production  which  Finkler's  father  had  helped  to  fund  by  paying  for  the
costumes  and  presenting  every  member  of  the  cast  with  a  strip  of  his
miracle pills, no matter that the costumes were bed sheets sewn together by
Finkler's mother and the pills gave everyone diarrhoea. Whatever Treslove
sang, stayed in his mind . . . The new pharaoh who knew not Joseph and set
over Israel taskmasters to afflict them with burthens, the children of Israel
sighing  by  reason  of  their  bondage  -  he  had  loved  'sighing'  over  that
bondage  in  the  choir  -  Moses  and  Aaron  turning  the  waters  into  blood,
causing frogs to infest the pharaoh's bedchamber and blotches and blains to
break forth on man and beast, and a thick darkness to cover the land, 'even
darkness which might be felt'. In the choir they had closed their eyes and
stretched out their hands, as though to feel the darkness. It was a darkness
that Treslove could still close his eyes and touch. Small wonder, he thought,

that  Egypt  was  glad  to  see  the  Israelites  depart,  'for  the  fear  of  them  fell
upon them' . . . Job done, in his view.

But  then  there  was  Part  the  Second  which  consisted  mainly  of  the
children of Israel telling God what He had done for them, and how like unto
Him there was no other.

'Is that why your God abandoned you,' he remembered saying to Finkler
after  the  concert,  'because  you  bored  the  living  fucking  daylights  out  of
him?'

'Our God has not abandoned us,' Finkler had replied in anger. 'And don't

you blaspheme.'

Those were the days!
Watching  people  around  him  reading  from  right  to  left  he  recalled
Finkler's schoolyard boast. 'We can read from both ends of a book,' he had
told Treslove, who couldn't begin to imagine how it was possible to do such
a  thing  or  what  powers  of  secret  knowledge  and  necromancy  were
necessary to achieve it. And not just any old book, but books written in a
script so ancient it should have been scratched with a sharp stone in rock
not written back to front on paper. No wonder Finkler didn't dream - there
was no room in his head for dreams.

Libor had quietly deposited Treslove more or less in the middle of a long
table  that  sat  about  twenty  people,  all  with  their  heads  in  books,  reading
from right to left. He was between an old lady and a young - young by the
standards of the gathering, that was. Allowing for the wrinkles on the older
lady and the somewhat too much flesh on the younger, Treslove took them
to be closely related. Something about the way they bent forward over the
table, like birds. He assumed that they were grandmother and grandaughter
or maybe divided by one generation more than that, but he didn't want to
scrutinise their features too closely while they were engrossed in the story
of Jewish deliverance. One thing he could not take his eyes off, though, was
the  book  from  which  the  older  lady  read.  It  appeared  to  be  a  children's
picture book with pop-ups and pull-outs. Fascinated, he watched her make a
nursery  game  of  reading,  turning  a  wheel  that  on  one  page  denoted  the
ceaseless tortures imposed on the Israelites as they laboured regardless of
the  hour,  now  under  a  burning  sun,  now  under  an  icy  scimitar-scooped
moon  -  and  on  the  opposite  page  showed  the  frogs  and  the  boils  and  the
darkness so thick you could feel it.

When it came to the crossing of the Red Sea the old lady pulled a tab,
and lo! where the Israelites had crossed in safety the waters overwhelmed
their enemies, and 'there was not one of them left'. She pulled the tab again
and again, drowning the Egyptians over and over.

Talk about disproportionality, Treslove thought, remembering something
he had read of Finkler's recently about Jews taking two eyes for every one.
But when he next looked, the old lady was irritably tugging at another tab
and making a little boy in a skullcap disappear beneath the table and come
up with a piece of matzo. This, too, she caused to happen again and again.
So it was repetition for the fun of it, not the vengeance.

He  looked  around  him,  struck  by  how  different  Libor's  table  was  from
how he remembered it in Malkie's day, or even the last time he was here
with Finkler. So many Finklers today - though no Sam Finkler - so much
food he didn't recognise, and so many elderly people at a form of prayer
that was not always to be distinguished from chatter or sleep.

The next thing he knew he was being asked, as the youngest manchild
present - 'Me?' he said in astonishment - whether he would like to recite the
Four Questions.

'I would if I could,' he told them. 'In fact, there are many more than four

questions I would like to ask. But I cannot read Hebrew.'

'Wrong  order,'  the  old  lady  said,  not  taking  her  eyes  from  her  book.
'We've gone past the Four Questions. We never do things in the right order
in  this  family.  Everything's  upside  down.  Who  is  he  anyway?  Another  of
our Bernice's?'

'Mother, Bernice died thirty years ago,' someone at the other end of the

table said.

'Then he shouldn't be here,' the old lady said.
Treslove wondered what he'd started.
The  granddaughter,  as  he  supposed,  or  was  it  the  great-granddaughter
laid a gentle hand on his. 'Take no notice,' she whispered. 'She's always like
this at a Seder. She loves it but it makes her angry. I think it's the plagues.
She feels a little guilty for them. But you don't have to read Hebrew. You
can ask the Four Questions in English.'

'But I can't read right to left,' Treslove whispered back.
'In English you don't need to.'
She opened the Haggadah at the relevant page and pointed.

told.
 

Why is this night different from all other nights?

Why on this night must we eat bitter herbs?
Why on this night do we dip our food twice?
On all other nights we may eat either sitting or leaning, but why on this

Treslove  looked  across  at  Libor  who  nodded  and  said,  'So  ask  the
questions.'  He  had  screwed  his  face  up  to  resemble  an  old  pantomime
Israelite. 'You're the Jew boy, ask the questions' was the message Treslove
read in it.

And Treslove, much embarrassed, but with a beating heart, did as he was

night must we all lean?
He found it difficult to listen to the answers. He had been made too self-
conscious by his reading. How did he know how to ask Jewish questions in
a room of Jews he had never before met? Were the questions meant to be
rhetorical? Were they a joke? Should he have asked them as Jack Benny or
Shelley  Berman  might  have  asked  them,  with  the  bitter  herbs  comically
inflected?  Or  hyperbolically  to  denote  the  extremity  of  Jewish  grief?  The
Jews were a hyperbolic people. Had he been hyperbolical enough?

Biiii  .  .  .  ttaah  -  what  if  he  should  he  have  delivered  it  like  that,  with
shuddery  theatricality,  in  the  manner  of  Donald  Wolfit  playing  Hamlet's
father's ghost?

'That's not the way you say them,' the old lady had shouted before he'd
even  finished  asking  the  first  question.  But  apart  from  calls  of  'Shush,
Mother' no one had taken any notice of her. But then no one had applauded
him either.

If the answers to his questions amounted to anything it was that this story
had to be told and retold - 'The more one speaks about the departure from
Egypt  the  better,'  he  read.  Which  wasn't,  if  he  understood  the  matter
correctly,  remotely  Finkler's  position. 
'Oh,  here  we  go,  Holocaust,
Holocaust,'  he  heard  Finkler  saying.  So  would  he  say  the  same  about
Passover? 'Oh, here we go, Exodus, Exodus . . .'

Treslove  liked  the  idea  of  telling  and  retelling.  It  suited  his  obsessive

personality. Further proof, if further proof were needed . . .

The service - if that was the word for something quite so shapeless and
intermittent - continued at a leisurely pace. Some groups pointed passages
out to one another, as though losing one's place and having it found for one

again was part of the joy of it all, others fell into what Treslove took to be
extraneous conversation, individuals nodded off or left the table to visit one
of Libor's many lavatories, some not returning until the Jews were well out
of Egypt, while one or two just stared into space, though whether they were
remembering  their  people's  departure  from  Egypt  five  thousand  years
before  or  were  looking  into  their  own  departure  tomorrow,  Treslove  was
unable to tell.

'There aren't enough children here,' an old man sitting opposite him said.
He  had  outworn  skin  and  a  great  cowl  of  boastful  black  hair  underneath
which  he  glowered  at  the  entire  table  as  though  everybody  there  had
wronged him at one time or another.

Treslove looked about. 'I think there are no children here,' he replied.
The  old  man  stared  at  him  in  fury.  'That's  what  I  said.  Why  don't  you

listen to what I'm saying? There are no children here.'

The table came together again for the Passover meal, which seemed to
mark the end of all liturgy. Treslove ate what was given him, not expecting
to enjoy it. Bitter herbs plastered between two slices of matzo - 'To remind
us of the bitter times we went through,' a person who had changed places
with the woman who had helped him with the Four Questions said. 'And are
still  going  through,  if  you  ask  me,'  said  someone  else;  an  explanation
contradicted by a third party who said, 'Rubbish, it represents the cement
with which we built the pyramids with our bare hands' - followed by egg in
salt water ('It symbolises our tears, the tears we spilt'), then chicken soup
with  kneidlach,  then  more  chicken  and  potatoes  which  as  far  as  Treslove
could  tell  symbolised  nothing.  He  was  pleased  about  that.  Food  that
symbolised nothing was easier to digest.

Libor came over to see how he was getting on. 'You like the chicken?' he

asked.

'I like everything, Libor. You cook it yourself?'
'I  have  a  team  of  women.  The  chicken  symbolises  the  pleasure  Jewish

men take in having a team of women to cook it for them.'

But if Treslove thought the ceremony had concluded with the meal, he
was mistaken. No sooner were the plates cleared away than it began again,
with  thanks  for  God's  enduring  loving  kindness,  songs  which  everyone
knew  and  quibbles  which  no  one  attended  to  and  fine  points  of  learned
exposition  culled  from  the  Jewish  sages.  Treslove  marvelled.  Rabbi
Yehoshua  had  said  this.  Hillel  had  done  that.  Of  Rabbi  Eliezer  a  certain

story  was  told  .  .  .  It  wasn't  just  a  historical  event  that  was  being
remembered, it was the stored intelligence of the people.

His people . . .
He  introduced  himself,  when  it  seemed  appropriate,  to  the  woman  he
took to be the old lady's great-granddaughter. She had taken up her place
again after visiting people at the furthest reaches of the room. She had the
look of a weary traveller returned from an arduous journey. 'Julian,' he told
her, lingering on the first syllable.

'Hephzibah,' she said, giving him a plump and many-silver-ringed hand.

'Hephzibah Weizenbaum.'

Saying her name seemed to tire her too.
Treslove  smiled  and  repeated  it.  Hephzibah  Weizenbaum  -  getting  his
tongue knotted on the 'ph' which she pronounced somewhere between an 'h'
and  an  'f',  but  which  he,  for  some  reason  -  a  Finkler  thing?  -  couldn't.
'Hepzibah,' he said. 'Hepzibah, Heffzibah, I can't say it, but such a beautiful
name.'

She was amused by him. 'Thank you,' she said, moving her hands more

than he thought was necessary, 'however you want to say it.'

Her rings confounded him. They appeared to have been bought at a Hell's
Angels'  shop.  But  he  knew  where  her  clothes  came  from.  Hampstead
Bazaar.  There  was  a  Hampstead  Bazaar  near  his  apartment  which  he
sometimes peered into on his way home, wondering why no woman he had
ever  proposed  marriage  to  ever  looked  like  the  multilaterally  swathed
models in the window. Hampstead Bazaar designed clothes for women who
had  something  to  hide,  whereas  all  Treslove's  women  had  been  skin  and
bones,  the  only  thing  they  had  to  hide  being  Treslove.  What  would  have
happened,  he  mused,  had  his  taste  in  women  been  different?  Would  a
woman with a fuller figure have stayed longer in his company? Might he
have found happiness with her? Might she have anchored him?

Hephzibah  Weizenbaum  was  tented  and  suggested  the  Middle  East.
There was an Arab shop on Oxford Street which sprayed perfume into the
traffic.  Treslove,  on  his  way  to  nowhere  in  particular,  sometimes  stopped
and breathed it in. Hephzibah Weizenbaum smelt like that - of car fumes,
and crowds of tourists, and the Euphrates where it all began.

She  smiled,  not  guessing  what  he  was  thinking.  The  smile  enveloped
him,  like  the  warm  waters  of  a  pool  buoying  up  a  swimmer.  He  felt  he
floated in her eyes, which were more purple than black. He tapped the back

of her hand, not thinking what he was doing. With her free hand she tapped
his. The silver rings stung him in a way he found arousing.

'So,' he said.
'So,' she replied.
She had a warm voice, like melted chocolate. She was probably full of
chocolate,  Treslove  thought.  Normally  fastidious  about  fat,  he  decided  it
looked good on her, swathed out of sight as it was.

She had a strong face, broad cheekbones - more Mongolian than Middle
Eastern - and a full, vivacious mouth. Mocking, but not mocking him, and
not mocking the ceremony. Just mocking.

Was he in love with her?
He thought he was, though he was not sure he would know how to love a

woman who looked so healthy.

'This is your first one, then,' she said.
Treslove  was  astonished.  How  could  she  have  known  she  was  his  first

healthy woman?

She saw his confusion. 'Your first Passover,' she said.
He smiled, relieved. 'Yes, but I hope not my last,' he said.
'I'll remember to invite you to mine, then,' she said, bunching up her eyes

at him.

'I'd like that,' Treslove answered. He hoped the reason she knew it was

his first Passover was his ignorance of the ritual, not his alien appearance.

'Libor has spoken of you many times,' she said. 'You and your friend.'
'Sam.'
'Yes,  Sam.  Julian  and  Sam,  I  feel  I  know  you  both  well.  I  am  Libor's
great-great-niece by marriage, that's to say on Malkie's side, unless I am his
great-great-great cousin.'

'Is everyone here the great-great-great cousin of the person sitting next to

them?' he asked.

'Unless they are more closely related, yes,' she said.
He nodded in the direction of the old lady. 'She your . . .?'
'She's my something. Just don't ask me to say precisely what. All Jews
are at furthest remove one another's great-great-great cousins. We don't do
six degrees of separation. We do three.'

'One big happy family?'
'I don't know about the happy. But family, yes. It can be a pain.'
'It wouldn't be a pain if you had never known an extended family.'

'Didn't you?'
'A mother and a father - that was it.'
He suddenly sounded orphaned to himself and hoped the spectacle of his

loneliness wouldn't make her cry. Or not too much.

'What I sometimes wouldn't give to have had a mother and a father and
that's  it,'  Hephzibah  surprised  him  by  saying.  'Though  God  knows  I  miss
them.'

'They aren't here?'
'Passed away. So I turn myself into a sort of universal daughter.'
(And mother? Treslove wondered.)
'You have siblings?'
'Not exactly. So I turn myself into a sort of universal sister too. I have
aunts, I have uncles, I have cousins, I have cousins of cousins . . . I spend a
month's salary on birthday cards. And don't remember half their names.'

'And  children  of  your  own?'  Treslove  made  it  sound  casual,  like  a

question about the weather. You finding it cold today?

She smiled. 'Not yet. No hurry.'
Treslove, who had not been good with babies, saw the babies they were
going  to  have,  for  this  time  it  would  be  different.  Jacob,  Esther,  Ruth,
Moishe, Isaac, Rachel, Abraham, Leah, Leopold, Lazarus, Miriam . . . He
began  to  run  out  of  names.  Samuel  -  no,  not  Samuel  -  Esau,  Eliezer,
Bathsheba, Enoch, Jezebel, Tabitha, Tamar, Judith . . .

Hudith.
'You?' she asked.
'Siblings? No.'
'Children?'
'Two.  Sons.  Both  grown  up.  But  I  wasn't  strictly  instrumental  in  their

rearing. I hardly know them really.'

He didn't want Hephzibah - Heppzibah . . . Heffzibah - Weizenbaum to
feel  threatened  or  excluded  by  his  children.  There  were  more  children  in
him, he wanted her to understand.

'You and their mother divorced, then?'
'Mothers.  Yes.  Well,  not  divorced  exactly.  We  only  ever  lived  together.

Separately, of course. And not for long.'

He didn't want her to feel threatened or excluded by the mothers of his
children either. But nor did he want her to think he was a fly-by-night. He

did  something  with  his  shoulders  which  he  hoped  she  would  interpret  as
emotional pain, but not too much.

'If you don't want to talk about it -' she said.
'No,  no.  It's  just  that  this  seems  such  a  big  family,  and  I  haven't  made
much  of  a  job  of  family  -'  yet,  he  thought  about  adding,  but  heard  how
wrong it might sound to her.

'Don't idealise us,' she warned, waving her ringed hands at him.
Us.
He melted into the word.
'Why not?'
'For all the usual reasons. And don't marvel at our warmth.'
Our.
Treslove  looked  at  her  evenly,  though  he  felt  the  floor  was  swaying.
'Then I won't,' he said, warmly. 'But I do wonder, since you say Libor has
mentioned me many times, why he has never introduced us. Has he been
keeping you under wraps?'

Not tactful - wraps.
Had  he  not  already  been  flushed  from  reading  the  Four  Questions,  he
would have flushed now. But not only on account of his lack of tact. On
account  of  his  lack  of  reserve.  'Where  have  you  been  all  my  life?'  his
expression said.

She put her lips together and shrugged. A gesture Treslove thought she
should forgo, given what it did to the flesh under her chin. He would find a
nice way of telling her that when they were married.

Then she laughed, as though it had taken her a minute to hear what he
had asked. 'It would need some wrap,' she said, pulling her shawl or tabard
or whatever it was around her

He was unable to hide his embarrassment. 'I'm sorry,' he said.
'Don't be.'
He met her eyes and searched for a question the answer to which would
bring  their  faces  closer  together.  'Hepzibah,'  he  said,  'Heffzibah  -'  but  his
uncertainty around her name left him floundering for the question.

It  brought  her  face  closer  to  his  anyway.  'Listen,'  she  said,  'if  I'm  too

much of a mouthful for you -'

'You aren't.'
'But if I am . . .'
This time he showed her his teeth. 'Believe me, you aren't.'

'But if I am, my friends call me Juno.'
Treslove held on to the undercarriage of his chair. 'Juno? Juno!'
She wasn't sure why he was quite so astonished. She made a downward
gesture with her hands, showing herself to him. Her bulk. She was under no
illusions about her size. 'The war goddess,' she said, laughing.

He laughed back. Or he tried to laugh back. Jovially, like the war god.
'Though the real reason,' she quickly added, 'is, I'm afraid, more prosaic. I

played Juno in Juno and the Paycock at school.'

'Juno? D'Jew say Juno?'
She looked at him in perplexity.
Well,  that  was  something,  Treslove  thought.  They  don't  all  play  word
games. Not that for her he wouldn't have set himself the task of mastering
every  trick  of  verbal  funsterism  in  the  Finkler  book  of  high-semantic
footling.  Words  had  numeric  significance  for  Finklers,  he'd  read  that
somewhere. And even the name of God was a pun on something else. No
doubt  Juno,  if  he  only  knew  how  to  numeralise  and  decode  it,  spelt  out
Treslove's Hour Has Come.

 

Why is this night different from all other nights?

The question answered itself.
Juno. Juno, by Jesus!

Part Two

SIX

1

Every other Wednesday, festivals and High Holy Days permitting, Finkler
met with fellow ASHamed Jews at the Groucho Club in Soho. Not all of
them  dreamed  of  punching  their  fathers  in  the  stomach.  Some  still  felt  a
tender attachment to the faith in which they'd been nurtured - hence their
having  to  make  their  excuses  when  an  ASHamed  Jew  night  clashed  with
what they were still Jewish enough to call Yom Tov: Rosh Hashanah, Yom
Kippur,  Succot,  Simchat  Torah,  Shavuot,  Purim,  Pesach,  Hanukkah.  'And
Uncle Tom Cobley and all,' as Finkler said.

In the case of such ASHamed Jews as these it wasn't the J word but the Z
word  of  which  they  were  ashamed.  For  which  reason  there  was  always  a
degree of fretting at the edges of the movement in the matter of what they
called  themselves.  Wouldn't  it  more  accurately  describe  the  origin  and
nature of their shame if they changed their name to ASHamed Zionists?

On grounds of euphony, Finkler didn't think so. And on grounds of logic
he didn't think so at all. 'Call yourselves ASHamed Zionists,' he said, 'and
you at once preclude someone like me who was never a Zionist in the first
place.  What  is  more  you  open  the  group  to  a  non-Jewish  membership,
allowing that there are many people out there who are, in their humanity,
ashamed  of  Zionism.  Whereas  we  are  ashamed  in  our  humanity  as  Jews.
Which is the point of us, I think.'

It struck one or two of the members that there was racism implicit in this,
as  though  a  higher  value  was  to  be  placed  on  Jewish  shame  than  on  any
other sort, but Finkler quietened these rumblings by making the point that
while they didn't have a monopoly on shame, and were surely open to the
idea of making common cause with others who were as ashamed as they
were  -  he,  personally,  welcomed  a  degree  of  ecumenicism  in  this  -  only
Jews could be Jewishly ashamed. That is to say, only they could express,
from the inside, the emotion of betrayal.

This  did  lead  briefly  to  a  discussion  as  to  whether  Betrayed  Jews
wouldn't,  in  that  case,  be  the  best  name  for  them  of  the  lot.  But  again
Finkler won the day, arguing that betrayal was too petulant a word to nail

their  colours  to,  implying  as  it  did  that  they  were  against  Zionism  only
because it had excluded or jilted them in some way, and not because it was
a crime against humanity.

If one or two ASHamed Jews thought Finkler was having it both ways on
this - making a virtue of personal hurt and then decrying it - they kept the
thought to themselves. Perhaps because for them too their shame both was
and was not an accident of biography, both was and was not a murmuring of
their  hearts,  both  was  and  was  not  public  property,  its  justice  susceptible
now to reason, now to poetry.

It was settled, at least temporarily, in this manner: those ASHamed Jews
who  were  only  partially  ashamed  -  that's  to  say  who  were  ashamed,  qua
Jews, of Zionism but not, qua Jews, of being Jewish - were permitted to put
their  mortification  into  abeyance  on  Rosh  Hashanah,  Yom  Kippur  and
Hanukkah,  etc.,  and  would  resume  it  again  when  the  calendar  turned
secular.

As  for  the  others,  they  were  free  to  be  whatever  sorts  of  Jews  they
wanted. The group was nothing if not heterogeneous. It included Jews like
Finkler,  whose  shame  comprehended  the  whole  Jew  caboodle  and  who
didn't give a hoot about a High Holy Day, and Jews who knew nothing of
any  of  it,  who  had  been  brought  up  as  Marxists  and  atheists,  or  whose
parents had changed their names and gone to live in rural Berkshire where
they kept horses, and who only assumed the mantle of Jewishness so they
could throw it off.

The logic that made it impossible for those who had never been Zionists
to call themselves ASHamed Zionists did not extend to Jews who had never
been  Jews.  To  be  an  ASHamed  Jew  did  not  require  that  you  had  been
knowingly Jewish all your life. Indeed, one among them only found out he
was Jewish at all in the course of making a television programme in which
he was confronted on camera with who he really was. In the final frame of
the film he was disclosed weeping before a memorial in Auschwitz to dead
ancestors  who  until  that  moment  he  had  never  known  he'd  had.  'It  could
explain  where  I  get  my  comic  genius  from,'  he  told  an  interviewer  for  a
newspaper, though by then he had renegotiated his new allegiance. Born a
Jew on Monday, he had signed up to be an ASHamed Jew by Wednesday
and was seen chanting 'We are all Hezbollah' outside the Israeli Embassy on
the following Saturday.

It had been Finkler who suggested the Groucho Club as a venue for their
meetings when ASHamed Jews co-opted him to their cause. Until then, the
embryo  ashamed  had  met  at  one  another's  houses  in  Belsize  Park  and
Primrose Hill, but Finkler argued that that domesticated their struggle and
made  it  inward-looking.  To  those  who  shrank  from  discussing  matters  of
such  urgency  in  a  place  of  alcohol  and  laughter  (and  what  is  more  was
named after a Jew who joked about being Jewish) he urged the virtues of
publicity. It made no sense at all to be ashamed of being an ASHamed Jew.
The whole point of their shame was that it was out there for all to see.

It was Tyler's view that, for her husband, being an ASHamed Jew was
continuous  with  being  at  the  reflective  end  of  show  business.  She  had
accompanied  him  to  the  Groucho  Club  on  earlier  non-ASHamed  Jew
business  and  seen  the  way  he  behaved  -  the  ostentation  with  which  he
distributed  alms  to  the  educated  dossers  and  Big  Issue  sellers  who
congregated on the street outside, the flourish with which he inscribed his
signature in the members' book, the small talk he made with the staff who
rewarded him by being on mellifluous terms with his name, the pleasure he
took in mixing with film directors and fellow media-academics at the bar.
Now throw in his being a big shot with the ASHamed Jews and Tyler knew
exactly how his triumph felt to him - the immodest delight he took in seeing
his influence extend far beyond philosophy.

After Tyler's death - though he might have been expected, as a man no
longer judged ironically by his wife, to have seized the opportunity to be
more  riotously  self-satisfied  still  -  he,  if  anything,  toned  his  behaviour
down.  He  owed  her  memory  that,  he  thought.  His  seemliness  a  sort  of
epitaph to her.

That  she  would  have  preferred  it  had  he  given  up  being  ASHamed
altogether, he knew. But that far he couldn't go. The movement needed him.
The Palestinians needed him. The Groucho needed him.

It  wasn't  all  smooth  sailing.  On  quiet  nights  a  corner  table  in  the
restaurant  gave  them  just  the  right  degree  of  being  'out  there'  that  they
needed,  but  when  the  club  was  busy  other  guests  could  overhear  their
conversation  and  sometimes  assumed  they  were  free  to  join  in.  This  was
tolerable so long as uninvited interventions were sympathetic and not over-
boisterous,  but  disagreements  could  get  out  of  hand,  as  when  a  party  of
music-industry  diners  wearing  red  string  Kabbalah  bracelets  got  wind  of
what ASHamed Jews were about and tried to have them ejected from the

club as anti-Semites. An ill-tempered altercation followed in the course of
which the comedian Ivo Cohen ended up on the floor for the second time as
an ASHamed Jew (the other coming at a demonstration in Trafalgar Square,
on that occasion with a group calling themselves Christians for Israel).

'A fine example of Jewish spirituality, this is!' he huffed, tucking in his
shirt,  echoing  his  'A  fine  example  of  Christian  spirituality,  this  is!'  with
which  he'd  challenged  his  assailants  in  Trafalgar  Square.  He  was  a  short
round man who didn't have far to fall. And as his stage act belonged to the
genre known as Marxist slapstick (Karl, not Groucho), which necessitated
his falling over a great deal, no one took the incident too seriously. But the
club  wasn't  prepared  to  allow  an  event  of  this  sort  to  occur  again  and
insisted  that  all  further  meetings  of  ASHamed  Jews  take  place  either
somewhere else or in a private room on the second floor.

One  member  of  the  group  recognised  the  quotation  and  wanted  it
removed. Another feared that the phrase 'we are self-hating Jews' would be
taken  out  of  context  and  used  against  them,  in  the  way  that  theatres
extracted a phrase like 'wonderful drama' from the sentence 'A wonderful
drama this is not'. A third asked why he and several other less prominent
ASHamees  were  not  named  as  signatories  to  the  letter  but  had  to  suffer

Though  he  had  no  desire  to  upset  Kabbalists,  whose  teaching  had  a
flakily practical side of which he approved, and who numbered among their
seekers  after  truth  Madonna  and  David  Beckham  -  both  of  whom,  he
suspected, were readers of his books and would have liked to meet him -
Finkler  felt  he  couldn't  let  the  occasion  go  without  berating  them  for  a
scurrilousness that did the Jewish mysticism of which they claimed to be
serious  students  no  credit.  As  for  charging  ASHamed  Jews  with  anti-
Semitism, 'The imputation,' he told them, closing his face, 'leaves us stone
cold.'

The quotation was from someone else. Finkler couldn't remember who.
Doubtless  some  anti-Semite.  Not  that  it  mattered.  It's  not  who  says  it,  or
what it means, but how you say it, and in what company.

Pleased with the reception from his fellow-ASHamees, Finkler repeated
the  formulation  -  'The  imputation  that  we  are  self-hating  Jews  leaves  us
stone cold' - in a rough draft of a letter that was ultimately published in the
Guardian and signed by the twenty most eminent of the ASHamed along
with '65 others'. 'Far from hating our Jewishness,' the letter went on, 'it is we
who continue the great Jewish traditions of justice and compassion.'

ignominious inclusion among the '65 others'. And a fourth questioned the
efficacy of writing letters to the Guardian at all.

'Gaza burns and we quibble over efficacy!' Finkler remonstrated.
A sentiment which could have been said to meet with universal approval
had Finkler only approved it himself. In fact, he wished he hadn't said it.
Gaza had galvanised the movement as it had galvanised the country but for
his part, perhaps because he liked to lead events not follow them, Finkler
could have looked the other way as far as Gaza was concerned. Gaza didn't
do it for him. The philosopher in him recoiled from all the talk of massacre
and slaughter on the streets. You keep the big unequivocal words for the big
unequivocal  occasions,  Finkler  thought.  And  there  was  an  illogicality  in
charging the country he didn't choose to name with wanton and unprovoked
violence while at the same time complaining its bombardment of Gaza had
been  disproportionate.  Disproportionate  to  what?  Disproportionate  to  the
provocation. In which case the operation had not been unprovoked.

Logically,  too,  disproportion  was  a  dog's  dinner  of  a  concept.  How  do
you measure? Do you trade rocket for rocket, life for life? Are you, once
provocation is conceded, not permitted to mete out retribution that will put
paid to it?

He was thinking beyond the specifics. The Israyelis were out of control.
He didn't doubt that. But what is true in the individual instance has to be
true  in  the  general.  And  what  his  fellow  ASHamees  were  saying  in  this
instance could easily be shown to be nonsense when applied elsewhere. He
did what was required of him; he drafted letters and stood on platforms, but
his heart wasn't quite in it. The frightening part was wondering if he might
just start forgetting what he was ASHamed of. Was there such a thing as a
Gaza-induced Alzheimer's?

Prior  to  Gaza  -  and  Gaza,  he  hoped,  was  his  dirty  little  secret  -  the
ASHamed  Jews  had  pronounced  themselves  largely  satisfied  with  his  de
facto  leadership.  He  was  seen  to  have  given  the  fledgling  movement  a
populist intellectualism which fully justified their original wooing of him.

Shortly  after  the  Kabbalah  fracas  it  was  agreed  with  the  club  that  they
could start with dinner in the restaurant, in the course of which they would
lower  their  voices  and  keep  the  conversation  uncontroversial,  and  then
move  up  to  a  private  room  on  the  second  floor  where  they  could  talk
without  fear  of  being  overheard  or  interrupted.  Not  even  a  drinks  waiter

would disturb them, if that was how they wanted it. This gave a clandestine
and even dangerous savour to their deliberations.

It  was  here,  about  two  years  into  his  association  with  the  group,  that
Finkler felt, for the first time since he'd joined - since, not to beat about the
bush, he'd as good as fathered it - that there was growing opposition to his
influence. He wasn't sure what caused it. Envy, presumably. Even the best
causes  are  susceptible  to  envy.  He  had  written  too  many  of  the  group's
letters. He had put himself forward for too many editions of Newsnight and
the Today programme. He had taken away something of the group shame
and appropriated it to himself. Sam Finkler - the ASHamed Jew.

'They'll soon realise their mistake,' Tyler had prophesied. 'With a greedy
bastard like you around they'll soon discover how hard it is to get their own
share of shame.'

But you can detect envy, Finkler believed, in the way people look at you
when they think you're not looking at them, and in the way they stop being
able to listen to you, as though every word you utter is a trial for them, and
this  was  a  less  personally  based,  more  ideological,  dissatisfaction,  which
caused  people  to  rub  their  faces  and  screw  up  their  eyes.  Was  Gaza  the
cause? Did they know him to be wobbling? He didn't believe he had been
rumbled.  His  equivocations  confused  himself,  never  mind  them.  He  had
even lent his name to the disproportion argument in a much noticed article
that went out under the heading 'How Many Eyes, How Many Teeth?'

Eventually  it  became  clear  to  him  that  Gaza  wasn't  the  problem,  the

problem was the 'Boycott'.

'The Boycott' was a shorthand term for the Comprehensive Academic and
Cultural Boycott of Israeli Universities and Institutions. There were other
boycotts  on  the  table  but  the  Comprehensive  Academic  and  Cultural
Boycott  was  the  talk  of  the  hour,  the  boycott  that  trumped  all  other
boycotts,  mainly  for  the  reason  that  its  chief  sponsors  were  academics  or
otherwise  cultured  persons  themselves  and  could  imagine  no  greater
deprivation  than  being  denied  access  to  academic  conferences  or  having
your latest paper refused by a learned magazine.

Finkler had poured scorn on the idea, firstly because he thought it feeble
-  'What  will  we  have  next,'  he  asked,  'the  Philatelic  Association  of  Great
Britain banning the licking of stamps in Israel?' - and secondly because it
closed down conversation where conversation was most likely to bear fruit.
'I am in principle against anything which denies dialogue or trade,' he had

said, 'but to bar communication between intellectuals, who are always our
best hope of peace, is particularly self-defeating and inane. It declares, inter
alia, that we have a) made up our minds about what we think, b) closed our
minds  to  what  others  think,  and  c)  chosen  to  go  on  hearing  nothing  with
which we happen to disagree.'

'What  else  is  there  to  hear?'  Merton  Kugle  wanted  to  know.  Merton
Kugle was the group's prime boycotter. Already he was boycotting Israel in
a private capacity, going through every item on his supermarket shelves to
ascertain its origin and complaining to the manager when he found a tin or
packet that was suspect. In pursuit of 'racist merchandise' - usually, in his
experience, concealed on the lowest shelves in the darkest recesses of the
shop - Merton Kugle had ruined his spine and all but worn out his eyes.

In Finkler's view, Kugle was one of the walking dead. But more than that,
his putrefaction was infectious. The moment Kugle spoke, Finkler wanted
to curl up in a corner and die.

'There  is  always  more  to  hear,  Merton,'  Finkler  said,  holding  on  to  the

table to stay upright. 'Just as there is always more to say.'

'Well,  some  of  us  don't  have  the  time  to  sit  here  and  hear  you  say  it,'
Kugle  said.  'So  far  you've  asked  us  to  oppose  a  consumer  boycott  of  all
Israeli goods and produce, a boycott on tourism to Israel, except where it
might  be  of  incidental  benefit  to  the  Palestinians,  a  boycott  of  Israeli
athletes and sportsmen -'

'There aren't any,' Finkler said.
'-  a  boycott  of  all  produce  grown  in  the  Occupied  Territories,  a

suspension of EU trade with Israel -'

'What about where it might be of incidental benefit to Palestinians?'
'- divestment from Israeli companies, divestment from companies which

invest in Israel or otherwise sponsor the illegal state, and now -'

Finkler  looked  around  the  room  to  gauge  what  support  Kugle  could
command. As always he was disappointed to see so few of the illustrious
actors and comedians - Ivo Cohen was not illustrious - so few of the living
legends of the culture - Merton Kugle was not living - whose commitment
to ASHamed Jews was what had originally attracted him to the group. He
enjoyed  being  the  star  of  the  show,  right  enough,  but  he  would  have
preferred the show in which he starred to have been a trifle starrier. First
among  equals  was  how  he  had  envisaged  his  role,  but  where  were  his
equals? Every now and then a letter or a text would be read out from one of

the  greats,  presently  touring  in  Australia  or  South  America,  wishing  the
group well in its indispensable work, and occasionally a DVD would show
up  in  which  the  eminent  musician  or  playwright  would  address  the
ASHamed  Jews  as  though  they  were  the  Nobel  Prize  Committee  whose
faith  in  him  he  deeply  appreciated  and  was  only  sorry  he  was  unable  to
receive the award in person. Otherwise, only academics with nowhere else
to go attended regularly, and writers like Kugle who hadn't written anything
anyone  wanted  to  publish,  and  a  number  of  the  free-floating  opinionated
who  called  themselves  analysts  and  spokespersons,  and  the  odd  self-
appointed director of the Institute of Nothing in Particular, and a couple of
semi-secular rabbis with worried eyes.

If Finkler had gone into adult education, these were the sorts of people

with whom he would have spent his evenings.

And  they  dared  to  be  having  second  thoughts  about  him!  Well,  he had

news for them: he was having second thoughts about them.

There were moments when he wondered what he'd let himself in for here.
If  I  don't  particularly  want  to  be  with  Jews,  where's  the  sense,  he  asked
himself,  in  being  with  these  Jews,  solely  because  they  don't  particularly
want to be with Jews either?

He  could  see  that  Reuben  Tuckman  was  trying  to  say  something.
Tuckman  was  a  Liberal  rabbi  who  wore  expensive  summer  suits  in  all
seasons and suffered from a soft stuttering lisp - unless it was an affectation,
which would not have surprised Finkler - that caused his eyes to close when
he  spoke.  This  gave  his  already  raffish  face  a  sleepy  sensuousness  which
accorded  ill,  Finkler  wanted  to  tell  him,  with  the  sanctity  of  his  office.
Tuckman,  a  man  on  semi-permanent  sabbatical,  had  recently  enjoyed
notoriety  for  mounting  a  lonely  vigil  outside  the  Wigmore  Hall  where  a
little-known  ensemble  from  Haifa  was  due  to  play.  In  fact,  the  ensemble
had  cancelled  because  of  ill  heath  but  Tuckman  had  kept  up  his  protest
anyway, as much to shame the concert hall (and as much, Finkler thought,
to  show  off  his  new  Brioni  linen  suit  in  Marylebone)  as  to  dissuade  the
public from buying tickets. 'I love m-music as much as anyone,' he told a
reporter,  'but  I  cannot  allow  my  thoul  to  thoar  on  the  back  of  innothent
blood.'

Rather  than  be  sidetracked  into  the  turgid  shallows  of  Tuckman's

conversation, Finkler returned to Kugle.

'I want to ask you something, Merton,' he said. 'Are we not family?'

'You and me?'
'Don't look so worried. Not you and me in particular. All of us. We've had
this argument a thousand times, but what are we ashamed of if not our own?
We  wouldn't  call  ourselves  ASHamed  Jews  if  the  object  of  our  criticism
was Burma or Uzbekistan. We're ashamed of our family, are we not?'

Merton Kugle could not give his assent to this. Where was the catch? The

other ASHamed Jews looked wary also.

Reuben  Tuckman  had  put  his  hands  together  horizontally,  as  though
praying  Buddhistically.  'Th-Tham,'  he  said,  making  a  peace  offering  of
Finkler's name.

But  Finkler  couldn't  wait.  'So  if  we're  family,  what's  with  the  boycott?

Whoever boycotted his own family?'

He  had  stolen  the  line  shamelessly  from  Libor.  But  that's  what  friends

were for. To give you things.

He was pleased to remember Libor, a Jew he liked.

2

'Dad, how do you ever know you're with the right woman?'

'How do I ever know or how does one ever know?'
'How do I ever know?'
It  relieved  Treslove  to  hear  Rodolfo  express  any  sort  of  interest  in
women,  let  alone  wonder  how  he  would  know  when  he'd  found  the  right
one.

'Your heart tells you,' Treslove said, laying a hand on his.
'Forgive my French, but that's bollocks, Dad,' Alfredo butted in.
They weren't in France, they were in Italy, on the Ligurian Riviera, eating
pesto  by  a  hotel  pool  and  looking  at  women.  The  holiday  which  both
Finkler and Libor had suggested he take he was finally taking, only in the
company of his sons, which no one had suggested. It was entirely his own
idea.

A five-day excursion, arranged very hurriedly, Dad paying, in the course
of  which  they  would  eat  well,  enjoy  some  late  autumn  sunshine,  get  to
know one another at last, and Treslove would attempt to clear his head of
some of the nonsense that had been filling it.

'So why is it bollocks?' Treslove asked.

'Well look at that one. Don't tell me that whoever you're with you're not

going to want a piece of that.'

'Her,' Treslove said.
'Yes, her.'
'No, her.'
Alfredo stared at him.
'You called her that. A piece of that. You should say a piece of her.'
'Christ, Dad. I thought we were meant to be on holiday. Her, then. But
take my point. Look at her figure. Perfect. Long legs, lean stomach, small
breasts.  You  take  a  woman  like  that  away  with  you  and  you  think  you'll
never look at another woman again. But now you see that - her. Voluptuous
figure, big tits, creamy thighs, and you wonder what you ever saw in the
skinny one.'

'You're  nothing  if  not  a  philosopher,'  Treslove  said.  'Have  you  been

dipping into Uncle Sam's book on Descartes and Dating again?'

'Well, you never did any better,' Rodolfo chipped in. 'Mum says you were

never with any woman for more than a fortnight.'

'Well that's only what your mum says.'
'Mine says the same,' Alfredo said.
'They  have  always  thought  alike  on  many  matters,'  Treslove  said,

ordering another bottle of Montalcino.

He wanted to spoil the boys. Give them what they'd missed. And spoil
himself too. Clear his head. That was the phrase he kept using. Clear his
head.

He  lay  in  a  deckchair  and  read  -  hiding  his  book  when  he  thought
someone might be looking - while his sons swam and talked to women. It
was  pleasant.  Not  the  view  -  the  view  down  into  the  Ligurian  Sea  was
spectacular. What was pleasant - no more than pleasant, but pleasant was
enough - was the being here with his sons. Should he leave it at this? he
wondered. Accept the role of paterfamilias, take his sons away twice a year,
and forget the rest. He would be fifty soon. Time to settle. Nothing else had
to happen. Who he was, he was. Julian Treslove. Bachelor of this parish.
Gentile. Enough.

Enough already.
In the middle of the afternoon Rodolfo came to sit by him.
Treslove hid his book.
'So?' Rodolfo asked.

'So, what?'
'So what's the answer to my question? How do you settle? How can you
be sure? And if you aren't sure, isn't the decent thing to do nothing? Don't
worry, I'm not asking your advice or anything. I just want to talk about it. I
want to know I'm not abnormal.'

Treslove wondered how to bring up the sandwich shop in which Rodolfo
wore an apron to mix ingredients. Not a leather or a PVC apron. A floral
apron.

For the holiday he wore a black velvet ribbon in his ponytail.
'Has it occurred to you that you might be gay?' he said at last.
Rodolfo got up out of his deckchair. 'Are you mad?' he said.
'I'm just asking.'
'Why are you asking?
'Well, in fact I'm not asking anything. You're the one who's asking what's
normal.  Everything  is  normal  is  my  answer  to  that,  or  nothing  is  normal.
Why do you care?'

'Why do you think I'm gay?'
'I don't think you're gay. And even if you were -'
'I'm not. OK?'
'OK.'
Rodolfo returned to his deckchair.
'I  like  her,'  he  said  after  a  decent  interval,  nodding  at  the  figure  of  a
young  woman  climbing  out  of  the  pool.  So  did  Treslove.  What  woman
doesn't  look  good  coming  up  out  of  a  pool?  But  over  and  above  that  -
woman  rising  from  the  amniotic  slime  -  she  had  the  famished  look  that
excited  him.  A  far  cry  from  .  .  .  well,  from  what  was  waiting  for  him  at
home.

The bottom half of the woman's bikini hung loose and wet on her. It was
impossible not to imagine sliding a hand inside, palm flat, fingers pointing
downwards, the tickle of the fur. Presumably Rodolfo, now he wasn't gay,
was imagining that very thing.

Unless he was just faking it for his father.
'Go get her, son,' Treslove enjoyed saying.
That evening there was dancing on the hotel terrace. Both Alfredo and
Rodolfo had found women. Treslove watched them contentedly. That's all
as  it  should  be  then,  he  thought.  Successful  fathering  was  not  as  hard  as
people made out.

After the dancing Alfredo brought his woman to meet his father.
'Hannah, my dad; Dad, Hannah.'
'I'm pleased to meet you,' Treslove said, getting up and bowing. To his

daughters-in-law, presumably, a man had to be ultra-courteous.

'You've got something in common,' Alfredo said behind his sunglasses,

laughing his empty restaurant pianist's laugh.

'What's that?'
'You're both Jewish.'
 

'So what was that about?' Treslove asked before the three of them retired.
The women had gone. Treslove didn't ask his sons if they were intending to
go after them.

This generation was easier about women than his had been. They didn't
go running. If the women left, they left. In Treslove's day a woman leaving
was catastrophic to your self-esteem. It presaged the end of the universe.

'It was about fun, Dad.'
'You  know  what  I'm  talking  about.  What  was  that  about  my  being

Jewish?'

'Aren't you?'
'Would it matter to you if I were?'
'There you go, answering a question with a question. That in itself makes

you Jewish, doesn't it?'

'I'll ask you again. Would it matter to you if I were?'
'Are you asking if we're anti-Semites?' Rodolfo said.
'And would it matter to you if we were?' Alfredo added.
'Well I'm definitely no anti-Semite,' Rodolfo said. 'You, Alf?'
'Nope. You, Dad?'
'Everyone's an anti-Semite to a degree. Look at your Uncle Sam, and he's

'Yes, but you?'
'What's this about? What's been said to you?'
'Who by? You mean our mums?'
'You tell me. What's the joke?'
'I ran into Uncle Sam a few weeks ago. He said you'd been the victim of
an anti-Semitic attack. He said a few other things as well, but let's just stick
with the anti-Semitic part. I asked how you could be the victim of an anti-

Jewish.'

Semitic  attack  if  you  weren't  a  Semite.  He  said  he'd  asked  you  the  same
question, and your answer was that you were.'

'I think that's one of my friend Finkler's famous simplifications.'
'Maybe, but are you?'
He  looked  from  Alfredo  to  Rodolfo  and  back  again,  wondering  if  he'd
ever  seen  them  before,  and  if  so  where.  'It  doesn't  mean  that  you are,' he
said, 'if that's what's concerning you. You can continue being whatever you
want to be. Not that I know what that is. Your mothers never told me.'

'Maybe you should have asked them,' Rodolfo said. 'Maybe they would

have appreciated your taking a hand in our religious education.'

He snorted before he'd finished.
'Let's not get into that,' Alfredo said. 'You say that just because you are it

doesn't mean that we are. But it does, doesn't it, a bit?'

'Depends which bit you're referring to,' Rodolfo said, still snorting.
'You can't be a bit Jewish,' Treslove said.
'Why not? You can be a quarter Indian or one tenth Chinese. Why can't
you  be  part  Jewish?  In  fact,  it  would  make  us  half  and  half,  wouldn't  it?
Which  is  considerably  more  than  a  bit.  I'd  call  that  a  lot.  I  have  to  say  I
quite fancy the idea, what about you, Ralph?'

Rodolfo  went  into  an  imitation  of  Alec  Guinness  being  Fagin.  'I  don't

mind if I do, my dears,' he said, rubbing his hands.

The two boys laughed.
'Meet  one  of  the  half-chosen,'  Alfredo  said,  extending  his  hand  to  his

'And allow me to introduce you to the other half,' Rodolfo said.
No, never seen them in my life before, Treslove thought. And wasn't sure

brother.

he wanted to again.

My sons the goyim.

3

Out  of  the  blue,  Libor  received  a  letter  from  a  woman  he  hadn't  seen  in
more  than  fifty  years.  She  wanted  to  know  if  he  was  still  writing  his
column.

He wrote back to her saying how nice it was to hear from her after all this

time but he'd stopped writing his column in 1979.

He  wondered  how  she'd  found  his  address.  He'd  moved  several  times
since  he'd  known  her.  She  must  have  put  herself  to  some  trouble  to  find
where he lived now.

He didn't tell her his wife had died. He couldn't be sure she even knew
he'd been married. And you don't go mentioning to women you haven't seen
in fifty years, and who have put themselves to trouble to find your address,
that you're a widower.

Hope life has been kind to you, he wrote. It has to me.
After he sent the letter he worried that the melancholy tone would give
her  a  clue.  It  has  to  me  -  there  was  a  dying  fall  in  that.  It  invited  the
question, And does it go on being kind to you? On top of which it somehow
painted him as frail: a man in need of kindness.

Only afterwards did it occur to him that he hadn't asked the reason for her

enquiry. Are you still writing your column? Why did she want to know?

That was rude of me, he wrote on the back of a postcard. Did you enquire

about my column with a purpose?

After he posted the postcard - it was a Rembrandt self-portrait, the artist
as an old man - he feared she would think he had chosen it to solicit her
pity. So he sent her another one of King Arthur in full regalia and in the
bloom of youth. No message. Just his signature. She would understand.

Oh, and nothing meant by it, his phone number.
That was how he came to be sitting in the bar of the University Women's
Club in Mayfair, clinking glasses of house champagne with the only woman
other than Malkie he had ever lost his heart to. A little. Emmy Oppenstein.
He  had  thought  she'd  said  Oppenheimer  when  they  first  met  in  1950  or
thereabouts. That wasn't the reason he had fallen for her, but without doubt
it added to her attractiveness. Libor was no snob but he was a child of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire and names and titles mattered to him. But by the
time he'd realised his mistake they had slept together and he was interested
in her for herself.

Or at least he thinks he was.
He sees nothing in her face that he remembers and of course nothing in
her figure. A woman in her eighties does not have a figure. He intended no
unkindness by that. To himself he said he meant no more than that at eighty
a woman is entitled at last to be free of being ogled for her shape.

He could see that she had been beautiful in a Slav way, with wide apart
ice-grey eyes and cheekbones on which an unwary man might cut himself

going  for  a  kiss.  But  it  wasn't  a  beauty  he  remembered.  Would  it  be  the
same sitting with Malkie, he wondered, had he left her fifty years ago and
were she living still? Had Malkie retained her beauty for him because she'd
retained it for a fact, for everyone who saw her, or had he kept her beauty
alive in his eyes by feasting on it every day? And if so, did that make her
beauty illusory?

Emmy Oppenstein was out of the question for him. He saw that at once.
He  hadn't  gone  to  meet  her  with  the  intention  of  courting  her  again,  he
absolutely had not. But had he, had he, he would have been disappointed.
As he hadn't, he was not disappointed, how could he be, but had he . . .

Not  disappointed  because  she  had  worn  badly.  For  most  decidedly  she
had not; she was, if anything, remarkable for her age - alert, elegant, well
dressed in a fluffy woven suit, which Malkie had taught him to recognise as
Chanel,  and  even  wore  high  heels.  For  her  age  a  woman  couldn't  have
looked  better.  But  for  her  age  .  .  .  Libor  wasn't  looking  for  a  woman  to
replace Malkie, but had he been looking for a woman to replace Malkie the
brutal truth was that this woman was, well, too old.

Libor was not blind to the cruel absurdity of such thoughts. He was an
elfin man with no hair, his trousers didn't always reach his shoes, his ties
had lain in drawers for half a century and had lost their colour, he was liver-
spotted from head to foot - who the hell was he to find any woman too old?
What is more, where he had shrunk, she must have grown taller, because he
had no memory of ever lying with a woman this size. A thought which he
could see, as she surveyed him, mirrored hers exactly. No doubt about it: if
she was out of the question for him, he was still more out of the question for
her.

And all this Libor had decided in the moment of their shaking hands.
She was, or she had been, a school governor, a justice of the peace, the
chair  of  an  eminent  Jewish  charity,  the  mother  of  five  children,  and  a
bereavement  counsellor.  Libor  noticed  that  she  left  the  bereavement
counselling  to  the  end.  Was  that  because  she  knew  of  Malkie  and  of  her
death?  Was  that  why  she  had  written  to  him?  Did  she  want  to  help  him
through?

'You must be wondering -' she began.
'I  am  wondering  but  I  am  also  marvelling,'  Libor  said.  'You  look  so

wonderfully well.'

She smiled at him. 'Life has been kind to me,' she said, 'as you wrote that

it had been to you.'

She touched his hand. Rock steady hers, as quivery as a jellyfish his. Her
nails  had  been  freshly  painted.  She  wore,  as  far  as  he  could  tell,  at  least
three engagement rings. But one might have been her mother's and another
her grandmother's. And then again they might have been all hers.

He enjoyed a retrospective pride in his own manliness for having slept
with a woman as impressive as she was. He wished he could remember her
but  he  couldn't.  Time  and  Malkie,  maybe  just  Malkie,  had  wiped  out  all
erotic memories.

So did that mean he hadn't slept with her at all? Libor feared losing the
life  he  had  lived.  He  forgot  things  -  places  he  had  visited,  people  he  had
known, thoughts that were once important to him. So would he soon lose
Malkie? And would it then be as though she too had never existed erotically
(eloticshrly) for him? As though she had never existed at all in fact.

He  told  Emmy  about  Malkie,  as  he  imagined  to  keep  her  alive  a  little

longer.

'I'm sorry,' she said when he had finished. 'I had heard something.'
'Would  you  drink  to  her  with  me?'  he  said.  'You  can't  drink  to  her
memory because you didn't know her, but you can drink to my memory of
her.'

'To your memory of her,' she said.
'And you?'
She lowered her gaze. 'Yes, the same.'
'Then I drink to you and your memories,' Libor said.
And  so  they  sat  and  sipped  champagne  together  companionably,  both
bereft, while single university ladies, some probably older than Malkie was
when she died, drifted by them lost in thought, or slowly climbed the stairs
to their bedrooms for an afternoon sleep in their London club.

Be a good place to die if you were a single woman, Libor thought. Or a

single man.

'I'm flattered,' he said after a while, 'that you knew I had a column, even

if you hadn't noticed I'd stopped writing it a century ago.'

'It's hard to keep up,' she said, unembarrassed.
Had  she  ever  been  embarrassed?  Libor  wondered.  Had  she  been
embarrassed  when  he'd  undressed  her,  that's  if  he  ever  had?  More  likely,
looking at her now, that she'd undressed him.

'I'll tell you why I contacted you,' she continued. 'I've been writing to all

my friends who have a public voice.'

Libor  dismissed  the  idea  of  his  having  a  public  voice,  but  that  only
seemed  to  make  her  impatient.  She  shifted  in  her  chair.  Gracefully.  And
shook  her  hair.  Grey,  but  not  an  elderly  grey.  Grey  as  though  it  were  a
colour of her choosing.

'To  what  end?'  he  asked.  He  recognised  the  public  woman,  the  charity
chief,  used  to  commandeering  the  airwaves  of  men's  attention  for  causes
she cared about.

And  then  she  told  him,  without  tears,  without  false  sentiment,  that  her
twenty-two-year-old grandson had been stabbed in the face and blinded by
an Algerian man who had shouted 'God is great' in Arabic, and 'Death to all
Jews'.

'I'm very sorry,' Libor said. 'Did this happen in Algeria?'
'It happened here, Libor.'
'In London?'
'Yes, in London.'
He  didn't  know  what  further  questions  to  ask.  Had  the  Algerian  been
arrested?  Did  he  offer  any  explanation  for  what  he'd  done?  How  did  he
know the boy was Jewish? Did it happen in an area known to be dangerous?
But what was the point of any of them? Libor had been lucky in love but
in politics he was from a part of the world that expected nothing good of
anybody.  Jew-hating  was  back  -  of  course  Jew-hating  was  back.  Soon  it
would  be  full-blown  Fascism,  Nazism,  Stalinism.  These  things  didn't  go
away. There was nowhere for them to go to. They were indestructible, non-
biodegradable.  They  waited  in  the  great  rubbish  tip  that  was  the  human
heart.

It wasn't even the Algerian's fault in the end. He just did what history had
told him to do. God is great . . . kill all Jews. It was hard to take offence -
unless, of course, the blinded boy was your child or grandson.

'I'm  unable  to  find  anything  to  say  that  isn't  banal,'  he  told  her.  'It's

terrible.'

'Libor,'  she  said,  touching  his  hand  again,  'it  will  be  more  terrible  still,

unless people speak up. People in your profession for a start.'

He wanted to laugh. 'People in my profession? People in my profession

interview famous film stars. And I'm not even in my profession any more.'

'You don't write at all now?'

'Not a word, except for the odd poem to Malkie.'
'But you must know people still, in journalism, in the film industry.'
He wondered what the film industry had to do with anything. Was she
hoping he knew someone who would make a film about the attack upon her
grandson?

But she had another reason for her specificity, for seeking out a journalist
of  Libor's  sort,  with  Libor's  connections.  She  named  a  film  director  of
whom Libor had assuredly heard but had never met - not his sort of film
director, not Hollywood, not show business - whose recent comments, she
believed, were nothing short of scandalous. Libor must have read them.

He hadn't. He wasn't up with the gossip.
'It's  not  gossip,'  she  explained.  'He  has  said  he  understands  why  some

people might want to blind my grandson.'

'Because they're deranged?'
'No.  Because  of  Israel.  Because  of  Gaza,  he  says  he  understands  why

people hate Jews and want to kill them.'

For the first time, her hand began to shake.
'Well, I can see why one might want to trace cause and effect,' Libor said.
'Cause  and  effect!  Where's  the  cause  in  the  sentence  "The  Jews  are  a
murderous people who deserve all they get"? In the Jews or in the author of
the sentence? I can tell you the effect, but where's the cause, Libor?'

'Ah, Emmy, now you are turning logician on me.'
'Libor, listen to me.' She bent her ice-grey eyes upon him. 'Everything has
a  cause,  I  know  that.  But  he  says  he  understands.  What  does  understand
mean  here?  Is  he  simply  saying  he  can  see  why  people  are  driven  to  do
appalling and terrible things? Or is he saying something else? Is he saying
that there is a justice in it, that my grandson's blindness is justified by Gaza?
Or  that  Gaza  vindicates  in  advance  whatever  crimes  are  committed  in  its
name?  Can  no  wickedness  now  be  done  to  any  Jew  of  any  age  living
anywhere  that  doesn't  have  Gaza  as  its  reasoning?  This  isn't  tracing  an
effect  back  to  its  cause,  Libor,  this  is  applauding  the  effect.  I  understand
why  people  hate  Jews  today,  he  says,  this  man  of  culture.  From  which  it
must follow that I understand whatever actions they take in expression of
their hatred. Dear God, will we now understand the Shoah as justified by
German abhorrence of the Jews? Or worse, as retrospective justice for what
the Jews were going to do in Gaza? Where does it end, this understanding?'

Libor knew where it ended. Where it always ends.

He shook his head, as though to contradict his own bleak thoughts.
'So  I  ask  you,'  Emmy  Oppenstein  went  on,  'as  I  am  asking  as  many
people in your profession as I know, to speak out against this man, whose
sphere, like yours, is the imagination, but who abuses the sacred trust of the
imagination.'

'You cannot tell the imagination where it can and cannot go, Emmy.'
'No.  But  you  can  insist  that  where  it  goes,  it  goes  with  generosity  and

'No,  you  can't,  Emmy.  Fairness  is  not  a  province  of  the  imagin-ation.

Fairness is the business of a tribunal, which is not the same animal.'

'I  don't  mean  that  sort  of  fairness,  and  you  know  it.  I'm  not  talking
balance. But what is the imagination for if not to grasp how the world feels
to those who don't think what you think?'

'But  isn't  that  the  very  understanding  you  cannot  forgive  in  your  film

fairness.'

man?'

'No, Libor, it is not. His sympathy is the simple expression of political
allegiance.  He  understands  what  his  politics  lead  him  to  understand.  He
agrees - that's all. Poof!' She clicked her fingers. A thing worth no more of
her time than that. 'Which means all he understands is himself, and his own
propensity to hate.'

'Well, that's something.'
'It's nothing. It's less than nothing if you don't call that propensity what it
is.  People  hate  Jews  because  they  hate  Jews,  Libor.  They  don't  need  an
excuse. The trigger isn't the violence in Gaza. The trigger, in so far as they
need  a  trigger  -  and  many  don't  -  is  the  violent,  partial,  inflammatory
reporting of it. The trigger is the inciting word.'

He felt that she was blaming him. Not his profession - him.
'Every  story  is  a  distortion,  Emmy.  Will  your  way  of  telling  it  be  any

more impartial than his?'

'Yes,' she said, 'it will. I see villains on all sides. I see two people with

competing claims, now justified, now not. I spread the wrong.'

A couple of women settled at a table opposite, both two decades younger
than  Emmy,  Libor  guessed.  He  thought  in  decades  now  -  ten  years  his
lowest  unit  of  measurement.  They  smiled  at  him.  He  smiled  back.  They
looked  like  vice  chancellors.  Something  about  the  length  of  their  skirts.
Two  vice  chancellors  meeting  to  discuss  their  respective  universities.  He
could live here, if they'd have him, as a sort of mascot. He would promise

not to make a nuisance of himelf, not to play his radio late at night and not
to talk about Jews. Take tea and biscuits with lady professors and rectors.
Discuss declining standards of written and spoken English. At least they'd
know who Jane Russell was.

He changed his mind. They wouldn't. And anyway, they weren't Malkie.
Villains on all sides, yes. And the word. What had she just said about the
word? Its power to incite. Well, that had never been a journey any of his
words had been on. Excite, maybe. Incite, never. He lacked the seriousness.
'There is a big difference,' he reminded her, as though half ashamed of
what he had done with his life, 'between writing about Anita Ekberg's chest
and the rights and wrongs of Zionism.'

But that wasn't the category of nicety she had met him to discuss. 'I tell
you  where  the  big  difference  is,  Libor.  The  big  difference  is  between
understanding  -  ha!  -  and  acquittal.  Only  God  can  give  absolution.  You
know that.'

He wanted to say he was sympathetic but couldn't help. Because he was
in no position to help and because none of it mattered. For none of it did
matter. But finding the right form of words for saying to Emmy Oppenstein
that none of it mattered was beyond him.

'It's not Kristallnacht,' he thought.
But he couldn't say that.
He'd  had  his  Kristallnacht.  Malkie  dying  -  without  God's  absolution  of

He was unable to decide whether he was disappointed that it wouldn't do
for her to counsel him or not. To know that he would have had to locate the
part of himself in which expectation resides. And he couldn't.

either of them, as far as he could see - what worse was there?

But he couldn't say that either.
'I'll speak to a few people I know,' was the best he could do.
But she knew he wouldn't.
In return - in return for nothing but an old affection - she gave him the
number  of  a  bereavement  counsellor.  He  told  her  he  didn't  require  a
bereavement  counsellor.  She  reached  out  and  put  a  hand  on  each  of  his
cheeks. This gesture meant that everyone needed a bereavement counsellor.
Don't think of it as counselling or therapy. Think of it as conversation.

So what was this? Was this not conversation?
A  different  kind  of  conversation,  Libor.  And  it  wouldn't  do,  she

explained, to be counselling him herself.

SEVEN

1

The agreement had been that Treslove would take his sons on holiday and
then see.

Heads he'd resume his previous existence, forget all the rubbish, go out
looking like Brad Pitt and return home, alone, at a reasonable hour in the
evening to his Hampstead flat that wasn't in Hampstead.

Tails he'd move in with Hephzibah.
'I don't want to be making room and then have you changing your mind
in a fortnight,' she told him. 'I'm not saying this is for life, God help us both,
but if you're going to seriously disrupt me, disrupt me because you want to,
not because you're at a loose end.'

He had told her about the mugging, but she did not set much store by it.
'That's what I mean by being at a loose end,' she said. 'You go wandering
around  with  your  head  in  the  clouds,  get  your  phone  snatched  like  just
about  everyone  else  at  sometime  or  another,  and  think  God's  called  you.
You aren't busy enough. There's been too little going on in your head and,
from the sound of it, your heart.'

'Libor's been talking.'
'Nothing to do with Libor. I can see it for myself. I saw it when I first

clapped eyes on you. You were waiting for the roof to fall in.'

He went to kiss her. 'And it did,' he said with exaggerated courtliness.
She pushed him away. 'I'm the roof now!'
He thought his heart would break with love for her. She was so Jewish.
I'm the roof now! And he'd thought Tyler was the business. Well, when had
poor Tyler ever done what Hephzibah had just done with language? I'm the
roof now!

That was what it was to be a Jewess. Never mind the moist dark womanly
mysteriousness. A Jewess was a woman who made even punctuation funny.
He  couldn't  work  out  how  she  had  done  it.  Was  it  hyperbole  or  was  it
understatement? Was it self-mockery or mockery of him? He decided it was
tone. Finklers did tone. As with music, they might not have invented it, but
they had mastered its range. They revealed depths in it which the inventors
of tone, like the great composers themselves - for neither Verdi nor Puccini

was a Finkler, Treslove knew that - could never have dreamed were there.
They  were  interpreters  of  genius.  They  showed  what  could  be  done  with
sound.

I'm the roof now! God, she was wonderful!
For his part he'd been ready to jump right in. Then and there. Marry me.
I'll do whatever has to be done. I'll study. I'll be circumcised. Just marry me
and make Finkler jokes.

She  was  what  he'd  been  promised.  And  the  fact  that  she  didn't  look
anything like the woman he thought he'd been promised - the fact that she
made  fools  of  all  his  expectations  -  only  proved  that  something  far  more
powerful than his inclination was in operation. Far more powerful than his
dreaming  inclination,  even,  for  she  was  decidedly  not  the  schoolgirl
bending  to  fasten  her  shoelace  in  his  dreams.  Hephzibah  could  not  have
bent that far down. When she tied her laces she put her foot up on a stool.
She was not his kind of woman. She came from somewhere other than his
wanting. Ergo - she was a gift.

It was she who was not sure. 'I, you see,' she explained, 'have not been

waiting for the roof to fall in.'

He tried to emulate her joke. 'I'm not the roof!'
She didn't notice.
He  threw  in  everything  he  had  -  a  shrug,  a  'so',  a  'now'  and  an  extra

exclamation mark. 'So, I'm not the roof now!!'

Still she didn't laugh. He couldn't tell if she was annoyed with him for
trying. Or maybe it was just that Finkler jokes didn't work in the negative. It
sounded funny enough to him. So, I'm not the roof now!! But it could have
been that Finklers only permitted other Finklers to tell Finkler jokes.

She'd had two husbands and wasn't looking for a third. Wasn't, in fact,

looking for anything.

stop being alive.

Treslove  didn't  believe  that.  Who  isn't  looking?  Stop  looking  and  you

But what she was most not sure of was him. How sure, or how reliable in

his sureness, he was.
'I'm sure,' he said.
'You've slept with me once and you're sure?'
'It's not about sleeping.'
'It  will  be  about  sleeping  if  you  meet  someone  you  want  to  sleep  with

more.'

He thought about Kimberley and was glad he'd managed to squeeze her
in in time. A last indulgence before life turned serious. Though she hadn't
been about sleeping either.

But he did as he was told. He went to Liguria with his two goyische sons

and came back ready to move in.

'My feygelah,' he said, taking her in his arms.
She laughed one of her big laughs. 'Feygelah, me? Do you know what

feygelah means?'

'Sure.  Little  bird.  Also  homosexual,  but  I  wouldn't  be  calling  you  a

homosexual. I bought a Yiddish dictionary.'

'Call me something else.'
He'd  come  prepared.  When  he  was  certain  his  sons  weren't  looking  he
had studied the Yiddish dictionary by the swimming pool in Portofino. His
aim had been a hundred Yiddish words to woo her with.

'My  neshomeleh,'  he  said.  'It  means  my  little  darling.  It  comes  from

neshomeh, meaning soul.'

'Thank you,' she said. 'I fear you're going to teach me how to be Jewish.'
'I will if you like, bubeleh.'
 

She had an apartment opposite Lord's. From her terrace you could watch the
cricket.  He  was  marginally  disappointed.  He  hadn't  moved  in  to  watch
cricket. He was sorry she didn't have a terrace that overlooked the Wailing
Wall.

There was another problem he had to negotiate. She had once worked for
the BBC. Not any longer, and it had been television rather than radio, which
diluted  her  offence  a  little,  but  she  retained  a  number  of  her  BBC
friendships.

'I'll go out when they come,' he told her.
'You'll stay here,' she said. 'You say you want to be a Jew - well, the first
thing you need to know is that Jewish men don't go out without their wives
or girlfriends. Unless they're having an affair. Other than another woman's
flat  there's  nowhere  for  Jewish  men  to  go.  They  don't  do  pubs,  they  hate
being seen uncompanioned at the theatre, and they can't eat on their own.
Jewish men must have someone to talk to while they eat. They can't do only
one thing at a time with their mouths. You'll learn. And you'll learn to like
my friends. They're lovely.'

'Nishtogedacht,' Treslove replied.

The  good  news  was  that  she  had  left  the  BBC  to  set  up  a  museum  of
Anglo-Jewish  culture  -  'what  we  have  achieved,  not  what  we  have
undergone; our triumphs not our tribulations' - on Abbey Road where the
Beatles  had  made  some  of  their  most  famous  records  and  pilgrims  still
turned up by the busload to cavort on the famous zebra crossing. Now they
would have a museum of Anglo-Jewish culture to visit when they'd finished
paying homage to the Beatles.

It wasn't so far-fetched. The Beatles had a Jew as their manager in their
breakthrough years. Brian Epstein. The fans knew how well he had guided
them and that his suicide might have been prompted by his unrequited love
for John Lennon, a non-Jew and therefore forbidden fruit. So there was a
tragic Jewish element to the Beatles story. This wasn't the prime motivation
for building a museum of Anglo-Jewish culture on Abbey Road, but it was
a practical consideration.

And yes, the Brian Epstein story would figure. A whole room was being
given  over  to  the  contribution  made  by  Jews  to  the  British  entertainment
industry.  Frankie  Vaughan,  Alma  Cogan,  Lew  Grade,  Mike  and  Bernie
Winters,  Joan  Collins  (only  on  her  father's  side,  but  a  half  is  better  than
nothing), Brian Epstein and even Amy Winehouse.

Hephzibah  had  been  headhunted  by 

the  eccentric  Anglo-Jewish
philanthropist who was himself a music producer and whose brainchild the
museum was. She was the best person for the job, in his view and in the
view of his foundation. The only person for the job. And Hephzibah, for her
part, relished the challenge.

'Considering  that  he  believes  the  BBC  is  biased  in  its  reporting  of  the

Middle East, it's something of a surprise he chose me,' she told Treslove.

'He knows you're not like the rest of them,' Treslove said.
'Not like the rest of them in what sense?'
'In the sense of being biased in their reporting of the Middle East.'
'Is that what you think?'
'About you? Yes.'
'I mean about the rest of them?'
'Being biased against what your Uncle Libor calls Isrrrae? Of course.'
'Have you always thought that?' She didn't want him changing his politics

just for her. He would only end up resenting her for that.

'No,  but  that's  only  because  I  didn't  think  about  it  at  all.  Now  I  do,  I

remember what anti-Semites they all were there, especially the Jews.'

knew,' she told him.

'The Jews I knew pretended they weren't Jewish. That was why they went
to the BBC - to get a new identity. It was the next best thing to joining the
Roman Catholic Church.'

'Bollocks,' she said. 'I didn't go there to get a new identity.'
'Because  you're  the  exception,  as  I  have  said.  The  ones  I  met  couldn't
wait to put their Jewish history behind them. They dressed like debutantes,
spoke like minor royalty, took the Guardian, and shrank from you in horror
if  you  so  much  as  mentioned  Isrrrae.  Anyone  would  have  thought  the
Gestapo was listening in. And all I was trying to do was ask them out an
date.'

'Why  would  you  have  said  the  word  Isrrrae  -  and  can  we  stop

pronouncing it like that - if you only wanted to ask them out on a date?'

'Small talk.'
'Maybe  they  thought  you  couldn't  see  them  without  thinking  of  Jewish

history, have you put your mind to that?'

'And why would that have been a problem for them?'
'Because Jews don't want to go around with nothing but their history on

their faces, Julian.'

For a moment he wondered if that was the reason he had fared so badly at

the BBC himself - anti-Semitism.

'Then you must have known very different Jews at the Beeb to those I

'They should be proud.'
'It's not for you to say what they should be. But anyway, I have to say I
never  came  across  anything  of  the  sort  you're  describing.  I  would  have
opposed it if I had. Jew isn't the only word in my vocabulary, but I am not
prepared to have my Jewishness monkeyed about with. I can take care of
myself.'

'I don't doubt it.'
'That, though, doesn't mean I don't allow other Jews to be as lukewarm

about their Jewishness as they like. OK?'

'OK.'
She kissed him. Yes, OK.
But  he  returned  to  the  subject  later.  'You  should  ask  Libor  what  he
thinks,'  he  said.  'Libor's  World  Service  experiences  were  very  similar  to
mine.'

'Oh, Libor's an old Czech reactionary.'

She had, in fact, already asked Libor, not about Jewish anti-Semitism at
the  BBC  but  about  Treslove.  Was  he  for  real?  Was  he  fucking  with  her
mind? Had he really been the victim of an anti-Semitic attack? Could Libor
vouch for him at any level?

Yes,  no,  who  could  say  and  absolutely,  Libor  replied.  He  had  known
Treslove since he was a schoolboy. He was deeply fond of him. Would he
make a good husband . . .

'I'm not looking for a husband.'
. . . only time would tell. But he hoped they would be very happy. With

one reservation.

She looked alarmed.
'I lose a friend.'
'How do you lose him? He'll be living closer to you if anything. And you

can come here for your supper.'

'Yes, but he won't be free to come out whenever I call him. And I'm too

old to be making long-range appointments. I take it a day at a time now.'

'Oh, Libor, nonsense.'
But it did strike her that he wasn't in the pink.
 

'In the pink? He's nearly ninety and he's recently lost his wife. It's a miracle
he can still breathe.'

Turning over in bed, Treslove surveyed the miracle that had transformed
his life. He had never shared a mattress with anyone her size before. Some
of the women he had slept with had been so narrow he hadn't always known
they were there when he woke. He had to search the bedclothes for them.
And as often as not they were gone. Hopped it. Slipped away in the early
morning without a sound, as slithery as rats. When Hephzibah so much as
stirred Treslove's half of the bed rolled like the Atlantic. He had to hang on
to the mattress. This didn't disturb his sleep. On the contrary he slept the
sleep of his life, confident in the knowledge that she was by his side - let
her toss as tumultuously as she liked - and was not going anywhere.

He now understood what Kimberley was for. She had been given him to
soften him up. To wean him off aetiolated women. She was a halfway house
to Hephzibah - his Juno.

She was not mountainous, his Juno. He wasn't sure it was fair even to call
her  plump.  She  was  simply  made  of  some  other  material  than  he  was
accustomed to women being made of. He remembered the woman coming

out of the pool in Liguria, the bottom half of her bikini wet and loose, her
skin  the  same,  at  one  and  the  same  time  spare  and  floppy,  as  though  the
small  amount  of  flesh  she  did  have  was  still  too  big  for  her  bones.
Hephzibah occupied her frame, that was how he saw it. She was physically
in harmony with herself. She filled herself out. Without her clothes she was
not bulky as he'd feared, there were no rolls of plumpness or flaps of excess
flesh. If anything she was taut and strong, only her neck a trifle too thick.
Consequently she was better to look at out of her clothes than in them. He
had dreaded what those purple and maroon Hampstead Bazaar cloaks and
shawls would conceal, and lo, when she removed them she was beautiful!
Hunoesque.

The big surprise was the lightness of her skin. Light in colour, he meant,
not light in weight. Every time he met a Finkler they changed the rules to
which  Finklers  were  meant  to  adhere.  Sam  Finkler  hadn't  been  dark  and
beetling, he'd been red and spidery. Libor was a dandy not a scholar. And
here was Hephzibah whose name evoked belly dancers and bazaars and the
perfume they sprayed outside the Arab shop on Oxford Street, but whose
looks  once  you  peeled  her  clothes  off  her  were  .  .  .  he  thought  Polish  or
Ukrainian at first, but the longer he feasted on her nakedness, the more he
thought Scandinavian, Baltic maybe. She could have been the figurehead of
an  Estonian  fishing  boat  -  the  Lembitu,  the  Veljo  -  that  plied  the  Gulf  of
Riga for herring. He had done a module on Norse sagas at university. Now
he knew why. To prepare him for his own Brunhild. As his friendships with
Finkler and Libor were to prepare him for his Brunhild being Jewish.

There were no accidents. Everything had a meaning.
It  was  like  a  religious  conversion.  He  would  wake  to  the  sight  of
Hephzibah  heaving  towards  him  and  experience  an  unfathomable  joy,  as
though the universe and his consciousness of it had miraculously joined up,
and there was nothing inharmonious in himself or in anything outside him.
It wasn't just Hephzibah he loved, it was the whole world.

God, being Jewish had stuff going for it!
 

He  gave  up  working  as  a  double  at  her  request.  It  demeaned  him  to  be
playing someone else, she thought. Now he had found her it was time he
played himself.

Thanks to provident parents and a couple of good divorces she was not
short of money. She was sufficiently not short, at least, for him to be able to

take time to think about what he was going to do. What about getting back
into  arts  administration?  Hephzibah's  suggestion.  Every  town  in  England,
every village in England, now had a literary festival; they must be crying
out for people with his knowledge and experience. Perhaps he could even
start one of his own on Abbey Road, close to the recording studios and the
museum. Between the Beatles and the Jews, a St John's Wood Festival of
the  Written  and  Performing  Arts.  Perhaps  featuring  a  permanently  sited
Centre of BBC Atrocities? His suggestion. Hephzibah thought not.

He wasn't sold on the festival idea, anyway. He remembered the woman
who kept her Birkenstocks on during lovemaking. No, he was done with the
arts.

It was what he had been waiting for all his life.

He wondered about training to be a rabbi.
'There could be obstacles to that,' she told him.
He was disappointed. 'What about a lay rabbi?'
She  wasn't  sure  whether  Judaism  recognised  a  laity  in  the  way  that
Anglicanism did. Perhaps Liberal Judaism had something of the laity in it,
but she was pretty sure he would still have to submit himself to strict Judaic
criteria.  And  there  was  something  called  Reconstructionism,  but  she
thought that was American, and she didn't want to go and live in America
with him.

In fact she didn't want him to be a rabbi full stop.
'You can want a break from Jewishry,' she said.
He said he hoped that wasn't why she'd chosen him.
She  said  it  wasn't,  but  she'd  had  two  Jewish  husbands,  and  while  she
wasn't for a moment suggesting that she and he were looking to get spliced,
she was relieved not to be living with a third Jewish man in any capacity.
Not a Jewish man in the usually accepted sense of the term, at any rate, she
added hurriedly.

Then  she  had  a  bright  idea.  What  about  assisting  her  in  setting  up  the
museum? In just how professional a capacity she couldn't be certain until
she'd  discussed  it  with  the  philanthropist  and  his  board,  but  she  would
appreciate his help in whatever form it came, if only while he looked about
him.

He was elated. He didn't wait for her to discuss him with the board. He
gave himself a job description. Assistant Curator of the Museum of Anglo-
Jewish Culture.

2

to fall over.

What Finkler hadn't been waiting for all his life was a dressing-down from
an ASHamed Jewish comedian.

Least of all when that comedian was Ivo Cohen who thought it was funny

On his own initiative, Finkler had begun to refer to ASHamed Jews as
ASH, the acronym he had suggested on the day he agreed to join the group.
'We  in  ASH,'  he  said  in  a  newspaper  interview  about  his  work  with
ASHamed Jews, and he had repeated the phrase on an early-morning radio
show.

'Firstly  there  already  is  an  ASH,'  Ivo  Cohen  said.  'It's  an  anti-smoking
charity with which, as a thirty-a-day man, I would rather not be confused.
Secondly, it sounds like we've been burnt alive.'

'And thirdly,' Merton Kugle interposed, 'it too closely resembles AISH.'
AISH  was  an  educational  and  dating  organisation  for  young  Orthodox

Jews, one of whose aims was to promote travel to Israel.

'Not much chance we'd be confused with that,' Finkler said.
'All we're asking,' Merton Kugle said, 'is that you don't change our name

without discussing it with us first. It isn't your movement.'

The unresolved boycott issue still rankled with Kugle who had now taken
to  stealing  Israeli  produce  from  his  supermarket  and  getting  himself
arrested.

Merton Kugle, burnt-out match of a man, according to Finkler, a dead-
faced blogger whom nobody read, an activist who activated nothing, a no
one - a nebbish, a nishtikeit, a nebechel: sometimes, even for Finkler, only
Yiddish  would  do  -  a  gornisht  who  belonged  to  every  anti-Zionist  group
that  existed,  along  with  several  that  did  not,  no  matter  that  some  were
sponsored by far-out Muslims who believed that Kugle, as a Jew, dreamed
of world conspiracy, and others expressed the views of ultra-Orthodox Jews
with  whom  Kugle  would  not  in  any  other  circumstances  have  shared  a
biscuit; so long as the phrase anti-Zionist was in the large or in the small
print, Kugle signed up.

'I am a Jew by virtue of the fact that I am not a Zionist,' he had recently

written in a soul-searching blog.

How  can  you  be  anything,  Finkler  wanted  to  know,  by  virtue  of  what

you're not? Am I a Jew by virtue of not being a Blackfoot Indian?

Looking around the room, Finkler met the blinking red-lidded gaze of the
oral-sociologist  and  socio-psychologist  Leonie  Leapmann.  Finkler  had
known  Leonie  Leapmann  at  Oxford  when  she  was  a  literary  theorist,
famous  for  her  short  skirts.  She  had  a  forest  of  flaming  red  hair  in  those
days, far more livid than his pale orange, which she would arrange around
herself when she sat, her naked legs drawn up to her chin, like a cat clothed
only in its fur. Now her hair was cropped and the fires had all but gone out
of it. The tiny skirts had gone too, in favour of ethnic leggings of all sorts,
on this occasion a set of Hare Krishna jodhpurs with dropped crotch. It was
a look Finkler couldn't read. Why would a woman want to wear a garment
that  made  her  resemble  an  overgrown  baby  that  had  filled  its  pants?  It
affected all his dealings with her, as though whenever she spoke there was a
smell in the room from which he had to avert his nose.

'Oh please, not this again,' she pleaded.
Finkler averted his nose.
Leonie Leapmann had always just come back from, or was always just
about to go to, the Occupied Territories where she had many close personal
friends of all persuasions, including Jews who were as ashamed as she was.
On Leonie people could reach out and touch the conflict. In the orbs of her
strained, red-lidded eyes they could see the suffering as in a goldfish bowl.

It was like watching a film in 3D.
'Not what  again,  Leonie?'  Lonnie  Eysenbach  enquired  with  offensively

studied politeness.

Lonnie was a presenter of children's television programmes and a writer
of school geography books from which he famously omitted Israel. He had
a  hungry  horse's  face  and  yellow  horse's  teeth  which  his  producers  were
growing extremely anxious about. He was scaring the children.

Lonnie and Leonie, both fractious and inflammable, had once been lovers

and carried the embers of a simmering resentment along to every meeting.

'I have friends out there, of both persuasions, who are close to suicidal or
homicidal despair,' Leonie said - which, to Finkler's sense, though he wasn't
going to make an issue of it, amounted almost to a threat of violence against
his person - 'and here we are still discussing who we are and what to call
ourselves.'

'Excuse me,' Kugle said, 'I am not aware that I have been discussing what
to call ourselves. I am a democrat. I bow to the majority decision. It's Sam
with his ASH -'

care,' Leonie shouted.

'Horsemen  of  the  Fucking  Apocalypse  is  good,'  Lonnie  said.  'Though

shouldn't it be Horsemen and Horsewomen.'

'We can call ourselves the Horsemen of the Fucking Apocalypse for all I

'Fuck you!' Leonie told him.
Averting  his  nose,  Finkler  sighed  a  sigh  deep  enough  to  shake  the
foundations  of  the  Groucho  club.  What  was  the  point  of  this  rehearsal  of
first principles every time they met? But it pained him to agree with Kugle
about  anything.  If  day  followed  night  to  Kugle,  then  Finkler  prayed  for
night never to end. 'I bow to no one in my Jewish shame,' he said. 'But isn't
it important that we make a distinction here?'

Kugle groaned.
'You have something more to say?' Finkler snapped.
Kugle shook his head. 'Just clearing my throat.'
'Oh, for God's sake,' cried Leonie Leapmann.
'You don't believe in God,' Lonnie Eysenbach reminded her.
'Let  me  see  if  I  can  help  here.'  The  speaker  was  Tamara  Krausz,
academically the best known of the ASHamed Jews, a woman whose quiet
authority commanded respect not only in England but in America and the
Middle East, wherever anti-Zionists - Finkler would not have gone so far as
to say wherever anti-Semites - were gathered.
Even Finkler wilted a little in her presence.
'Don't  we  have  to  show,'  she  continued  -  though  her  continuance  was
never in doubt, for who would dare interrupt her? - 'that to be a Jew is a
wonderful and various thing, and that it carries no more of a compulsion to
defend Israel against all criticism than it does to live in constant fear. We
are not, are we, a victim people? As that brave Israeli philosopher' - a nod
here to Finkler - 'Avital Avi said recently in a heartwarming speech in Tel
Aviv which I had the honour to hear from the platform, it is we who are
keeping the Holocaust alive today, we who continue where the Kapos left
off. Yes, of course it demeans the dead to forget them, but to disinter them
in order to justify carnage demeans them more.'

Her  voice  was  silvery  and  controlled,  a  reproach  in  particular,  Finkler
thought,  to  Leonie  Leapmann  whose  diction  lolled  and  wavered.  In  her
clothes,  too,  she  put  Leonie  to  shame.  Leonie  dressed  like  a  native  of  no
place one could quite put a name to - the People's Republic of Ethnigrad
was Finkler's best shot - whereas Tamara never appeared in public looking

anything  other  than  an  executive  of  a  fashion  consultancy,  at  once
businesslike and softly feminine.

Finkler, waiting, eyed her up. In shape she reminded him of his late wife,
but she was at once more steely and more fragile. She clawed the air, he
noticed, when she spoke, making fists at random, as though to crush the life
out of any idea that wasn't hers. He imagined her screaming in his arms, he
didn't know why. Just something to do with the way she was put together
and the atmosphere of psychic disintegration she gave off. In fact, psychic
disintegration  was  precisely  how  she  understood  the  history  of  modern
Israyel. Sent mad in the Holocaust, not least by their own impotence and
passivity,  Jews  were  spilling  what  was  left  of  their  brains  over  the
Palestinians  and  calling  it  self-defence.  Finkler  didn't  share  this  theory  of
madness  begetting  madness,  but  he  was  saving  up  the  occasion  when  he
would tell her so, in the hope of getting her to scream in his arms.

While in Palestine, Tamara reported - it was as though she was telling the
group about her holidays: indeed, Finkler wondered how long it would be
before the snaps came out - she had met with a number of representatives of
Hamas to express her concern in the matter of its recent forced Islamisation
programme,  which  included  accosting  unsuitably  dressed  women  on  the
beach,  harassing  shopkeepers  who  openly  sold  Western-style  lingerie,
segregating  the  sexes  in  schools,  and  generally  imposing  more  and  more
restrictions  on  the  human  rights  of  women.  That  this  would  impact
negatively  on  the  support  Hamas  could  count  on  from  otherwise
sympathetic  groups  in  Europe  and  America  she  did  not  scruple  to  warn
them. Entranced, Finkler imagined the leadership of Hamas quaking before
Tamara's  exquisitely  outraged  feminism.  Did  they,  too,  imagine  her
screaming in their arms?

'Not good,' he said.
'No,'  she  agreed,  'not  good  at  all.  And  especially  not  good  as  we  can
expect  pro-Zionists  to  pounce  on  this  as  evidence  of  Hamas's  intrinsic
extremism and intolerance. Whereas . . .'

Tamara Krausz breathed deeply. Finkler breathed with her.
'Whereas . . .' he said.
'Whereas  the  truth  of  it  is  that  what  is  being  enacted  here  is  the  direct
consequence of the illegal occupation. You cannot isolate a people, cut them
off from their natural connection to the country, degrade and starve them,
and not expect extremism to follow.'

'You certainly cannot,' Leonie said.
'No,' Tamara said quickly, before Leonie could say anything else. 'Avital,
with whom I discussed this, even went so far as to suggest it was a dark
fulfilment  of  deliberate  Israeli  policy.  Drive  Gaza  further  and  further  into
itself until the West would be begging Israel to reconquer it.'

'Sheesh,' Finkler said.
'I know,' she said, meeting his eyes.
'How is Avital?' he asked suddenly.
Tamara Krausz opened her face to him. Finkler felt he'd been handed a

flower. 'He isn't well,' she said. 'Not that he'd admit it. He's tireless.'

'Yes, isn't he,' Finkler replied. 'And Navah?'
'Well, thank God. Well. She's his right hand.'
'Is she ever.' Finkler smiled, handing her a flower in return.
The knowledge that this moment of insider intimacy between them was
driving the others crazy filled him with a quiet satisfaction. He could hear
Kugle's heart shrivel.

Only poker gave him comparable pleasure.

3

Libor went to see the bereavement counsellor Emmy had recommended. A
dark,  towering  woman  big  enough  to  dangle  him  on  her  knee.  She  could
have been the ventriloquist, he her dummy.

'Jean Norman,' she said, extending an arm long enough to go around his

back and work his levers.

Jean  Norman.  Such  a  plain  name  for  such  an  exotic  personage,  he
thought  it  must  have  been  assumed  to  calm  the  bereaved.  Real  name
Adelgonda Remedios Arancibia.

He did it as a favour to Emmy. For himself he wouldn't have bothered.
What  did  he  hope  to  be  counselled  into  feeling?  Cheerful  about  his
prospects?

He  felt  bad  that  he  had  not  been  able  to  answer  Emmy's  appeal  for
support.  Finkler  was  the  most  eminent  public  figure  he  knew  now  and
Finkler  was  hardly  going  to  speak  out  against  the  film  director  who
understood  why  people  wanted  to  kill  Jews.  For  all  Libor  knew  to  the
contrary the two were bosom friends.

could do for Emmy.

Jean Norman. Real name Adelaida Inessa Ulyana Miroshnichenkop.
She  lived  in  Maida  Vale,  not  all  that  far  from  where  Treslove  lived,
though  Treslove  had  called  it  Hampstead,  or  rather  from  where  Treslove
had lived before he moved in with Libor's great-great niece. He would have
preferred it had she worked out of a clinic or a hospital, but she saw him in
the front room of her house.

She was, she explained, retired. But still counselled . . .
Libor thought she was going to say for a hobby or to keep her hand in,

but she left the sentence to dangle like a person on the end of a rope . . .

So  going  to  the  bereavement  counsellor  was  the  second-best  thing  he

The house was large but the room she invited Libor into was diminutive,
almost like a room in a doll's house. There were prints on the walls of rural
scenes.  Shepherds  and  shepherdesses.  And  a  collection  of  porcelain
thimbles on the mantelpiece. She was too tall for the room, Libor thought.
She had to fold herself almost into three in order to fit into her chair. Her
height made Libor feel foolish. Even with both of them sitting down he had
to look up at her.

She had a fine Roman nose with open dark nostrils into which Libor had
no  choice  but  to  stare.  Despite  her  foreignness  there  was  an  air  of  the
Women's Institute about her, that look of shy strait-laced provincial glamour
which proved such a success when women of this sort took their clothes off
for a charity calendar. She would have long pendulous breasts and a deep
dark open Sicilian navel, Libor guessed.

He  wondered  if  her  ability  to  make  him  imagine  her  without  clothes,
though  she  was  covered  from  her  neck  to  her  ankles  and  never  made  a
movement  that  was  remotely  suggestive,  was  part  of  her  bereavement
counselling technique.

They talked briefly about Emmy. Emmy had told her who Libor was. She
remembered his articles and even described one or two of them correctly.
There were famous photographs. She remembered some of those too. Libor
laughing with Garbo. Libor lying on a bed with Jane Russell, Libor looking
the less masculine of the two. Libor dancing with Marilyn Monroe, cheek to
cheek in an impossible parody of romance, given all the disparities.

'You should have seen me dance with my wife,' Libor said.
He said it as a favour to her, just as coming to see her was a favour to

Emmy. He assumed this was his role. To do favours and be bereaved.

He was relieved she didn't say anything inane about the death of loved
ones - he hated the expression loved ones; there weren't loved ones, there
was only loved Malkie - or cycles of emotion or pathways for grief.

Nor, for which he was no less grateful, did she treat him to any sideways
glances of compassion. She did not sorrow for him. She left him to sorrow
for himself.

As the time wore on he found it increasingly difficult to concentrate on
anything  she  was  saying.  Jean  Norman.  Real  name  Fruzsina  Orsolya
Fonnyaszto.

He continued to look up into her nostrils where it was soothingly dark

and quiet.

'About Marilyn,' she said.
'Marilyn Monroe? What about her?'
'You knew her well?'
'Yes.'
She blew out her cheeks and patted her chest. 'So tell me . . .'

As for what he said to her, he had no idea. He mouthed his feelings. He
play-acted  at  grief.  He  spoke  the  words  which  he  imagined  the  bereaved
spoke at such a time. Even made the accompanying gestures. Had he stayed
there long enough he believed he'd have begun to wring his hands and tear
his hair.

His self-consciousness surprised and appalled him. What need was there

for this? Why did he not simply speak his heart?

Because  the  heart  did  not  speak,  that  was  why.  Because  language
presupposes artificiality. Because in the end there was nothing, absolutely
nothing, to be said.

Did  she  know  that,  Jean  Norman?  Real  name  Maarit  Tuulikki
Jaaskelainen. Was it part of her professional knowledge that the bereaved
sat in front of her, looked up into her nostrils and lied?

He should have howled like an animal. That at least would have been a
genuine  expression  of  how  he  felt.  Except  that  it  wasn't.  There  was  no
genuine expression of how he felt.

She had a question for him before he left. She became, in the asking of it,
more  animated  than  in  the  whole  time  he  had  been  with  her.  Clearly  this
was the real, in fact the only, reason he was here. What she was about to ask
him she had wanted to ask him from the moment he walked in the room.
No, from the moment she knew he was coming to see her.

'Yes?'
'Did she take her own life, or was she murdered?'

4

Treslove and Hephzibah are singing love duets in the bath.

 

Finkler is losing money at poker.
 
Libor is sinking fast.
 
Finkler is losing money at poker but his books are selling well and at least
he hasn't made a pass at Tamara Krausz.

Libor is sinking fast because he has lost Malkie. Emmy has been ringing
him with news of her grandson. He will not get his sight back. There has
been another attack on two Jewish boys wearing fringes, Emmy also tells
him.  And  headstones  in  a  Jewish  cemetery  in  north  London  have  been
defaced. Swastikas. What does she want him to do? Start a vigilante group?
Mount a guard on every Jewish burial place in London?

Libor  is  at  pains  not  to  confuse  his  feelings  about  Jews  being  attacked

again in public places with his feelings for Malkie.

Treslove and Hephzibah are singing 'O soave fanciulla', 'Parigi o cara', 'E

il sol dell'anima', 'La ci darem la mano', and so on.

Whatever  aria  he  knows  she  knows.  How  astonishing  is  that?  he  asks

himself.

Everything they sing is either a hello or a goodbye. That's opera for you.
Treslove sings them all as goodbyes. Hephzibah as hellos. So even when
they differ they are complementary and he is the beneficiary.

Her voice is strong, more suited to Wagner. But they won't be singing any
Wagner, not even Tristan und Isolde. 'My rule of thumb is that if there's an
"und" anywhere I won't be singing it,' she tells him.

He's beginning to understand Finkler culture. It's like Libor and Marlene
Dietrich, assuming Libor had told the truth about Marlene Dietrich. There
are  some  things  you  don't  do.  Very  well,  Treslove  won't  do  them  either.
Show him a German and he'll kick the living shit out of the mamzer.
Mamzer is Yiddish for bastard. Treslove can't stop using the word.
Even of himself. Am I lucky mamzer or what am I? he asks.

 

In celebration of being such a lucky mamzer, Treslove invites Finkler and
Libor to a dinner party. Come and toast my new life. He thought of asking
his  sons  but  changed  his  mind.  He  doesn't  like  his  sons.  He  doesn't  like
Finkler either, come to that, but Finkler is an old friend. He chose him. He
didn't choose his sons.

Finkler whistled through his teeth when he walked out of the lift straight

on to Hephzibah's terrace.

'You've landed on your feet,' he whispered to Treslove.
Crude  mamzer,  Treslove  thought.  'Have  I?'  he  asked,  tersely.  'I  wasn't

aware I'd been off my feet.'

Finkler dug his ribs. 'Come on! Teasing.'
'Is that what you're doing? Well, glad you like it here, anyway. You can

watch the cricket.'

English.

'Can  I?'  Finkler  liked  cricket.  Liking  cricket  made  him,  he  thought,

'I meant one can. One can watch cricket from here.'
He  had  no  intention  of  inviting  Finkler  over  to  watch  cricket.  Finkler
enjoyed enough advantages already. Let him buy a ticket. Failing which, let
him sit on his own terrace and watch the Heath. There was lots to see on the
Heath,  as  Treslove  remembered.  Not  that  he  remembered  much  of
Hampstead now. He had been in St John's Wood three months and couldn't
recall ever having lived anywhere else. Or with anyone else.

Hephzibah occluded his past.
He took Finkler into the kitchen to meet Hephzibah who was brewing at

the stove. He had been waiting for this moment a long time.

'Sam, d'Jew know Jewno?' he said.
Not a flicker of understanding or recollection from Finkler.
Treslove  thought  about  spelling  it  out  to  jog  his  memory,  though  he
believed it unlikely that Finkler ever forgot anything he himself had said.
Finkler never went anywhere without a notebook in which he wrote down
whatever he heard that interested him, mostly his own observations. 'Waste
not, want not,' he once told Treslove, opening his notebook. Which Treslove
took to mean that Finkler routinely recycled himself, knowing he could get
a whole book out of a mumbled aside. So Treslove's money was on Finkler
remembering his D'Jew know Jewno jest but not wanting to allow Treslove
a jest in return.

But  by  now  the  two  had  already  shaken  hands  anyway,  Hephzibah

wiping hers on her cook's apron.

'Sam.'
'Hephzibah.'
'My delight is in you,' Finkler said.
Hephzibah inclined her head graciously.
Treslove's face was a question mark.
'That's what Hephzibah means in Hebrew,' Finkler told him. 'My delight

is in you.'

'I know that,' Treslove said, miffed.
The bastard had got him again. You never knew from which direction it
would come. You prepared yourself for a Finkler joke and they bamboozled
you with Finkler scholarship. You could never steal a march on them. They
always had something you didn't, some verbal or theological reserve they
could draw on, that would leave you stumped for a response. The mamzers.
'I  must  go  on  with  what  I'm  doing,'  Hephzibah  said,  'or  you  won't  eat

tonight.'

'My delight is in your cooking,' Treslove said, to no one's interest.
In fact, in Treslove's eyes Hephzibah didn't so much cook as lash out at
her ingredients, goading and infuriating them into taste. No matter what she
was preparing she always had at least five pans on the go, each of them big
enough to boil a cat in. Steam rose from four of them. Burning oil from the
fifth. Every window was open. An extractor fan sucked noisily at whatever
it could find. Treslove had suggested closing the windows when the fan was
on,  or  turning  the  fan  off  when  the  windows  were  open.  They
countermanded  each  other's  function,  he  explained  scientifically,  the  fan
sucking in half the fumes of St John's Wood. But Hephzibah ignored him,
banging her cupboard doors open and closed, using every spoon and every
casserole  she  owned,  breathing  in  the  flames  and  the  smoke.  The  sweat
poured down her brow and stained her clothes. Every couple of minutes she
would pause to wipe her eyes. Then on she'd go, like Vulcan stoking the
fires  of  Etna.  And  at  the  end  of  it,  there  was  an  omelette  and  chives  for
Treslove's supper.

Though he complained of the illogic of her methods, Treslove loved to
watch  her.  A  Jewish  woman  in  her  Jewish  kitchen!  His  own  mother  had
prepared five-course meals in an egg pan. The three of them would sit and

wait  for  the  food  to  cool  and  then  eat  in  silence.  As  for  the  washing  up,
there wasn't any. Just the egg pan and the three plates.

Finkler  breathed  in  the  odours  of  Hephzibah's  devastated  kitchen  -  had
the Cossacks been through they'd have left it tidier - and said, 'Ahhhh! My
favourite.'

'You don't even know what I'm preparing,' Hephzibah laughed.
'Still my favourite,' Finkler said.
'Name an ingredient.'
'Trayf.'
Treslove knew what trayf meant. Trayf was whatever wasn't kosher.
'Not in this kitchen,' Hephzibah said with mock offence. 'My Julian won't

eat trayf.'

played by Heifetz.

My Julian. Music to Treslove's ears. Schubert, played by Horowitz. Bruch

Hey, Sam - D'Jew know Jewno?
Finkler  made  a  noise  like  a  gargle  from  far  back  in  his  throat.  'You've

koshered the old boy now?'
'He's koshered himself.'
 

It disconcerted Treslove - her Julian or not - to watch the two Finklers go on
eyeing each other up and verbally trying each other out. He felt like piggy
in the middle. Hephzibah was his woman, his beloved, his Juno, but Finkler
appeared to believe he had an older claim. It was as though they spoke a
secret language. The secret language of the Jews.

I  must  learn  it,  Treslove  thought.  I  must  crack  their  code  before  I'm

through.

But at the same time he felt pride in Hephzibah that she could do what he
could not. In twenty seconds she had reached deeper into Finkler's soul than
he ever had. He even appeared relaxed in her company.

When Libor arrived, Treslove truly felt outnumbered. Hephzibah exerted
an  unexpected  influence  on  his  two  guests  -  she  dissolved  their  Jewish
differences.

'Nu?' Libor asked of Finkler.
Treslove wasn't sure if that was the way to report it. Do you ask 'Nu' of?
Or do you just ask, transitively? 'Nu?' he asked. And is it even a question in
the accepted sense? 'Nu,' he said. Would that have been better? Nu, meaning
how are things with you, but also I know how things are with you.

So much to master.
But the surprise was that Finkler answered in kind. When there had been
no Hephzibah he had castigated Libor for his Jewish barbarisms, but today
he twinkled like a rabbi. 'A halber emes izt a gantser lign,' he said.

'A half truth is a whole lie,' Hephzibah whispered to Treslove.
'I know,' he lied.
'So who's been telling you half-truths?' Libor asked.
'Who hasn't?' Finkler replied. But that was as far as he was prepared to

Nu,  then,  wasn't  searching.  You  didn't  have  to  answer.  It  permitted

prevarications in the name of our common imperfect humanity.

Got it, Treslove thought.
At dinner, though, Libor went for Finkler as in the old days. 'Not your

Jewish anti-Semite friends?'

'Not my Jewish anti-Semite friends what?'
Normally,  Treslove  noted,  Finkler  denied  his  Jewish  friends  were  anti-

go.

Semites.

'Telling you lies?'
'They're fallible like the rest of us,' he said.
'You're sick of them already? That's good.'
'What's  good,'  Finkler  said,  'is  this  .  .  .'  He  reached  for  more  of
everything. Herrings in red wine, herrings in white wine, herrings in cream,
sour  cream,  vinegar,  herrings  curled  around  an  olive  with  toothpicks
through them, herrings chopped in what was said to be a new way, and of
course chopped still in the old - herrings brought in fresh from the North
Sea on the trawler of which Hephzibah was the figurehead, one breast bared
- and then the pickled meat, the pastrami, the smoked salmon, the egg and
onion,  the  chopped  liver,  the  cheese  that  had  no  taste;  the  blintzes,  the
tsimmes, the cholent. Only the cholent - the meat and bean and barley shtetl
stew, or Czech stew as Hephzibah called it in honour of Libor who loved
coming over to eat it - was hot. All those roaring flames, all those fuming
pans,  and  yet  everything  that  came  to  the  table,  barring  the  cholent,  was
cold.

Treslove marvelled. There was no getting to the bottom of the miracles

his wife performed, allowing that she wasn't yet his wife.

'I  knew  it,'  Finkler  said  when  he  got  to  the  cholent.  'Helzel!  I  knew  I

could smell helzel.'

Treslove knew it, too, but only because Hephzibah had told him. Helzel
was  stuffed  chicken  neck.  In  her  opinion,  no  cholent  could  call  itself  a
cholent without helzel. Finkler clearly thought the same.

'You've used oregano in the stuffing,' he said, licking his lips. 'Brilliant

touch. My mother never thought of oregano.'

Mine neither, Treslove mused.
'Is it a Sephardic version?' Finkler wondered.
'It's my version,' Hephzibah laughed.
Finkler looked at Treslove. 'You're a lucky man,' he said.
A lucky mamzer.
Treslove  smiled  in  agreement,  savouring  the  helzel.  Stuffed  chicken
neck, for Christ's sake! The entire history of a people in a single neck of
chicken.

And Finkler the philosopher and ASHamed Jew, licking his chops over it

as though he'd never left Kamenetz Podolsky.

After the cholent, the towelling down.
Hephzibah kept an elegant table, had Treslove polish the glasses and the
silverware  hours  before  anyone  arrived,  but  in  the  matter  of  napery  they
might as well have been in a transport cafe. In front of every guest was a
stainless-steel dispenser of paper napkins. The first time Treslove ever set
the table for the two of them he folded napkins as his mother had taught
him, in the shape of sailing ships, one per person. Hephzibah commended
his dexterity, unfurling the little ship and laying it daintily on her lap, but
when he next went to fold the napkins he found the serviette dispensers in
their  place.  'I  am  not  encouraging  gluttony,'  Hephzibah  explained,  'but  I
don't want whoever sits at my table to feel they must hold back.'

Hephzibah  herself  would  get  through  a  dozen  napkins,  more  after
cholent.  Treslove's  mother  had  brought  him  up  not  to  leave  a  mark  on  a
napkin  if  possible,  so  that  it  could  be  folded  back  into  a  sailing  ship  and
used again. Now, following Hephzibah's example, he used a fresh one for
every finger.

Everything was different. Before Hephzibah he had eaten only with his
mouth. Now he ate with his whole person. And it took many paper napkins
to keep his whole person clean.

'So this museum . . .' Finkler said, when the table was cleared.
Hephzibah inclined her head in his direction.
'. . . don't we have enough of them already?'

'Museums in general, you mean?'
'Jewish museums. Everywhere you go now, every town, every shtetl, you
find a Holocaust museum. Do we need a Holocaust museum in Stevenage
or Letchworth?'

'I'd  be  surprised  if  you'd  find  a  Holocaust  museum  in  Letchworth.  But
this  isn't  a  Holocaust  museum  anyway.  It's  a  museum  of  Anglo-Jewish
culture.'

Finkler laughed. 'Is there any? Will it mention our being thrown out in

'Of course. And of our being welcomed back in in 1655.'
Finkler shrugged, as though to an audience who already believed what he
believed. 'Same old, same old,' he said. 'You'll get to the Holocaust in the
end,  if  only  under  the  heading  "British  Attitudes  To".  You'll  stick  up
photographs of the gas ovens, you mark my word. Jewish museums always
do. What I want to know, if we must have suffering, is why we can't at least
change the track from time to time. What about a Museum of the Russian
Pogrom? Or a Museum of the Babylonian Exile? Or, in your case, since you
already have the site, a Museum of All the Nasty Things the English Have
Ever Done to Us?'

'The brief is not to bring up English nastiness,' Hephzibah said.
'I'm glad of it.'
'Nor,' Treslove chimed in, 'is it to bring up anybody else's. Our museum

won't so much as mention the Holocaust.'

Finkler stared at him. Our! Who asked you? his expression said.
Libor stirred in his chair. In an inconsequent but oracular voice, he said,

'The grandson of a friend of mine has just been blinded.'

Finkler  wasn't  sure  what  to  do  with  his  face.  Was  this  some  sort  of  a
wind-up? So? was what he wanted to ask. So how does that bear upon our
conversation?

'Oh, Libor, who?' Hephzibah asked.
'You don't know the grandson, you don't know the grandmother.'
'Well, what happened?'
So  Libor  told  them,  leaving  out  the  information  that  in  another  age  he

1290?'

and Emmy had been lovers.

'And this,' Finkler said, 'you adduce as reason for there to be a Holocaust

museum in every parish in the country.'

'I  notice  you  say  parish,'  Treslove  said.  'Your  satire  acknowledges  an
incongruity that is only to be explained by Christianity's inhospitability to
Jews.'

'Oh,  for  fuck's  sake,  Julian.  My  satire,  as  you  call  it,  acknowledges  no
such thing. I see Libor is upset. I mean no disrespect to his feelings. But the
actions  of  one  deranged  person  don't  justify  us  wringing  our  hands  and
claiming the Nazis are back.'

'No, and nor do I claim any such thing,' Libor said in return.
Hephzibah left the table and went over to him. She stood behind his chair
and put her hands on his cheeks as though he were her little boy. Her rings
were  bigger  than  his  ears.  Libor  leaned  back  into  her.  Hephzibah  put  her
lips to his bald head. Treslove feared the old man was going to cry. But that
might only have been because he feared he was going to cry.

'I'm all right,' Libor said. 'I am as much upset by my own impotence as by
what's happened to my friend's grandson whom I have never met and didn't
know existed two months ago.'

'Well, there's nothing you can do,' Hephzibah said.
'I know that. But it isn't only the doing nothing that's upsetting, it's the

feeling nothing.'

'I wonder whether we feel nothing,' Finkler said, 'precisely because we

rehearse our feelings on the subject too freely and too often.'

'Crying Wolfowitz, you mean?' Hephzibah said with a wild laugh.
God, I love her, Treslove thought.
'You think we don't?' Finkler persisted.
'I think we can't.'
'You don't believe that too many false alarms result in no one taking any

notice?'

face.

'When is an alarm a false alarm?' Hephzibah persisted.
Treslove saw Finkler wondering whether to say When our friend Julian
raises it. What he said instead was: 'It seems to me we create a climate of
unnecessary  anxiety,  a)  by  picturing  ourselves  forever  as  the  victim  of
events, and b) by failing to understand why people might occasionally feel
they have good reason to dislike us.'

'And blind our children,' Hephzibah said. Her hands were still on Libor's

Libor put his hands up to hers, as though to deafen himself. 'As in anti-
Semitism  is  perfectly  comprehensible  to  me,'  he  said,  in  imitation  of  the

empathetic film director.

'And so around it comes,' Hephzibah said.
Finkler shook his head as though there was nothing to be done with any
of  them.  'So  your  Museum  of  Anglo-Jewish  Culture  is  a  museum  of  the
Holocaust after all,' he said.

The yutz, Treslove thought. The groisser putz. The shtick drek.
 

Finkler  and  Libor  sat  and  drank  whisky  while  Treslove  and  Hephzibah
washed up. Hephzibah normally left the dishes until the next day. Piled up
in the sink so that it was near impossible to fill a kettle. And what the sink
couldn't take would stay on the kitchen table. Pans and crockery sufficient
for a hundred guests. Treslove liked that about her. She didn't believe they
had to clean up after every excess. There wasn't a price to pay for pleasure.
She didn't leave the dishes so that he should do them either. She just left
them. It seemed fatalistic to him. A carelessness acquired courtesy of the
Cossacks.  Since  you  don't  know  where  you're  going  to  be  tomorrow,  or
indeed whether you're going to be alive or dead, why worry over dishes?

But  tonight  she  led  him  by  the  elbow  into  the  kitchen.  And  neither
Finkler nor Libor offered to get up and help out. It was as if each couple
was giving the other space.

'Our friend appears very happy,' Libor said.
Finkler agreed. 'He does. There's a shine on him.'
'And my niece, too. I think she's good for him. It would seem that what

he needed was a mother.'

'Always did,' Finkler said. 'Always did.'

EIGHT

1

Finkler was looking forward to a few hands of online poker before bed, so
he  was  disappointed,  when  he  arrived  home,  to  find  a  message  on  his
answerphone from his daughter Blaise. Immanuel, the younger of his two
sons, had been involved in an anti-Semitic incident. Absolutely nothing to
worry about. He was perfectly OK. But Blaise wanted her father to hear it
from her first, rather than from some other, possibly mischievous, source.

Over a crackling line, Finkler could not make out all the details. As he
pressed the replay button it occurred to him that the message could easily be
a wind-up - Julian, Libor and Hephzibah, who were still drinking when he
left, teaching him a little moral lesson. See how you feel when it happens to
you, Mr ASHamed Jew Philosopher. But the voice was definitely Blaise's.
And  though  she  said  there  was  absolutely  nothing  to  worry  about,  there
obviously was, otherwise why would she have rung?

He rang back but Blaise wasn't answering. She often didn't. Immanuel's
line was permanently engaged. Maybe the bastards had stolen his phone. He
tried his other son, Jerome, but he was at a redder, more robust university
than  Blaise  and  Immanuel  and  was  inclined  to  be  scathing  about  their
doings. 'Anti-Semites massing outside Balliol? I don't think so, Dad.'

As  it  was  too  late  to  call  his  driver,  and  he  was  too  drunk  to  drive
himself, Finkler rang a limo firm he sometimes used. Oxford, he told the
operator. Right away.

He  had  to  ask  for  the  radio  to  be  turned  down  and  then  turned  off
altogether.  This  so  incensed  the  driver,  who  claimed  he  needed  it  on  for
traffic  alerts,  that  Finkler  feared  he  was  going  to  be  involved  in  an  anti-
Semitic incident himself. Traffic alerts! At midnight! Once they were out of
London,  on  quieter  roads,  it  occurred  to  Finkler  that  the  real  reason  the
driver needed the radio on was to keep him awake. 'Maybe we should have
it on after all,' he said.

He  fell  prey  to  all  manner  of  irrational  anxiety.  He  had  unnecessarily
annoyed  the  person  taking  him  to  see  his  son.  He  had,  for  all  he  knew,
annoyed  his  son,  too,  in  any  one  of  the  thousands  of  ways  that  a  father

annoys his children. Had his son got into a fight with anti-Semites on his
father's  behalf?  Shamed  or  not  shamed,  Finkler  was  an  eminent  English
Jew. You couldn't expect racist thugs to grasp the fine distinctions of Jewish
anti-Zionism. Ha, so you're Sam Finkler's son are you, you little kike? Then
here's a bloody nose.

Unless it was worse than a bloody nose.
He curled up in the corner of the Mercedes and began to cry. What would
Tyler say? He felt he had let her down. She had made him promise to make
the  children  his  first  priority.  'Not  your  fucking  career,  not  your  Jewish
mistresses  with  fat  tits,  not  those  weirdos  you  hang  around  with  at  the
Groucho  -  your  sons  and  daughter.  Your  sons  and  daughter,  Shmuelly  -
promise!'

He'd promised and he meant it. At the funeral he'd put his arms around
the boys and they had stood together a long time looking into Tyler's grave,
three lost men. Blaise had held herself apart from them. She was with her
mother. Against all men, lost or not. The three of them had stayed with him
a week, and then gone back to their universities. He wrote to them, he rang
them, he invited them to launches and screenings. Some weekends he drove
to Oxford, on others to Nottingham, booking himself into the best hotel he
could find and treating them to slap-up dinners. He believed he had done
well, morally, on those occasions, not to take a woman with him. Especially
when  he  stayed  at  Raymond  Blanc's  Manoir  Aux  Quat'Saisons  in
Oxfordshire,  a  hugger-mugger  hotel-restaurant  which  cried  out  for  a
mistress. But a promise is a promise. He was putting his children first.

He liked his children. They reminded him, in their different ways, of his
poor wife - sharp, edgy, scratchy boys, a scathing girl. None had chosen to
study  philosophy.  He  was  glad  of  that.  Blaise  was  a  lawyer.  Immanuel,
more unsteady, had changed from architecture to languages and looked set
to change again. Jerome was an engineer. 'I'm proud of you,' Finkler told
him. 'A nice non-Jewish occupation.'

'How do you know I won't be going over to Israel to build walls when I'm
qualified?' the boy said. But his father looked so alarmed he had to explain
he was only joking.

Both  the  boys  had  girlfriends  to  whom,  he  believed,  they  were
fastidiously faithful. Blaise was wilder and uncommitted. Like her mother.
Jerome  wasn't  sure  he  had  found  Miss  Right  yet.  Immanuel  thought  he
might have. Already, he wanted children of his own. Finkler imagined him

wheeling  his  family  around  the  Ashmolean,  bending  over  their  prams,
explaining this and that, adoring their little bodies. The new man. He had
never  quite  managed  to  be  that  sort  of  a  father  himself.  There  were  too
many things he had found interesting apart fom his children, apart from his
wife, too, come to that. But he was trying to make amends now.

What if it was all a bit late? What if his neglect had contributed in some
ways to this attack? Had he left his children vulnerable, unable to take care
of themselves, insufficiently aware of danger?

And  then  there'd  been  the  conversation  earlier  in  the  evening.  He  had
listened unsympathetically to the story of a boy blinded for no other reason
than  that  he  was  a  Jew.  Was  that  chancing  providence?  Finkler  didn't
believe in the validity of such a thought, but he had it nonetheless. Had he
dared the Jewish God to do His worst? And had the Jewish God decided,
for  the  first  time  in  however  many  thousands  of  years,  to  buckle  up  and
meet the challenge? A terrible thought occurred to him: had Immanuel been
blinded?

And a more terrible thought still: was it his doing?
Finkler the rationalist and gambler made a compact through his tears. If
Immanuel had suffered any serious harm he would tell the ASHamed Jews
where to shove it. And if he hadn't suffered any serious harm . . .?

Finkler didn't know.
It made no sense to implicate ASHamed Jews in this. They were not to
blame for anything. They just were. As anti-Semites just were. But you can't
play  fast  and  loose  with  primal  passions.  He  wasn't  sure,  though,  as  he
crouched in the corner of the car, willing the miles to fly by, whether it was
any  longer  defensible  even  to  use  the  word  Jew  in  a  public  place.  After
everything  that  had  happened,  wasn't  it  a  word  for  private  consumption
only? Out there in the raging public world it was as a goad to every sort of
violence and extremism.

It was a password to madness. Jew. One little word with no hiding place

for reason in it. Say 'Jew' and it was like throwing a bomb.

Had Immanuel been boasting of his Jewishness? And if he had, why had
he? To pay him, Finkler, back? To express his disappointment in him? My
father  might  be  ashamed  to  be  a  Jew  but  I  as  sure  as  fuck  am  not.
Whereupon whack!

It all came back to him. Whichever way he looked at it, he was to blame.
Bad  husband,  bad  father,  bad  example,  bad  Jew  -  in  which  case,  bad

philosopher as well.

But  this  was  no  better  than  superstition,  was  it?  He  was  a  prin-cipled
amoralist.  What  you  did  you  did,  and  there  was  no  retributive  force  out
there holding you to account. Yes, there was material cause and effect. You
drove badly, you had a crash. But there was no moral cause and effect. Your
son did not get blinded by an anti-Semite because you took mistresses, or
because you did not take the threat of anti-Semitism as seriously as some of
your more hysterical fellow Jews believed you should.

Or did he?
This  was  not  the  first  time,  Finkler  remembered,  that  mistresses  had
destabilised the workings of his highly rational mind. Take a mistress and
you have a car crash. Finkler did not of course believe that. Except in the
material  cause-and-effect  sense.  Take  a  mistress  and  have  her  give  you  a
blow job while you're driving down the M40 and your car might well spin
out of control. That's not morality, it's concentration. So why, when he was
out driving with a mistress, did he feel a little less safe than when he was
out driving with his wife? Men and women were not fashioned, he believed,
to live monogamously. It was no crime against nature to sleep with more
than one woman. It was a crime against aesthetics, maybe, to be out on the
town with Ronit Kravitz's vertiginous decolletage when he had an elegant
wife waiting for him at home, but no payment was ever exacted by God or
society for a crime against aesthetics. So whence his apprehension?

Yet  apprehensive  he  always  was,  whenever  he  committed  one  of  those
sexual crimes which in his eyes were no crime. The car would crash. The
hotel would burn down. And yes - for it was as primitive as this - his dick
would fall off.

He could explain it. Terror pre-dated reason. Even in a scientific age men
retained some of that prehistoric ignorance of which irrational fear was the
child. That Finkler understood the causes and consequences of events made
not a jot of difference. The sun might still not rise one morning because of
something  he  had  done  or  some  ritual  he  had  left  unobserved.  He  was
afraid,  as  a  man  born  half  a  million  years  before  him  would  have  been
afraid,  that  he  had  disobeyed  the  ordinances  of  the  gods  and  they  had
visited their vengeance on his son.

 

He  arrived  at  Immanuel's  lodgings  sometime  after  one  o'clock  in  the
morning. There was no one in. He tried the phone again but the line was

still engaged. Blaise, too, was not answering. He directed the driver to the
Cowley  Road  where  Blaise  lived.  The  lights  were  on  in  her  front  room.
Finkler  knocked,  needlessly,  at  her  window.  Someone  he  didn't  recognise
drew  the  curtains  back,  then  Blaise  showed  her  face.  She  appeared
astonished to see him.

'This wasn't necessary,' she said, letting him in. 'I said he's OK.'
'Is he here?'
'Yes, he's lying down on my bed.'
'Is he all right?'
'I've said. He's fine.'
'Let me see him.'
He found his son sitting up on Blaise's bed reading a celebrity magazine
and drinking rum and Coke. He had a plaster on his cheek and his arm was
in a home-made sling. Otherwise he looked perfectly well.

'Oops,' he said.
'What do you mean, "oops"?'
'Oops as in oops-a-daisy. It's what you used to say when one of us fell

over.'

'So you fell over, did you?'
'I did, eventually, yes.'
'What do you mean, "eventually"?'
'Dad, are you going to keep asking me what I mean?'
'Tell me what happened.'
'There's a prior question, Dad.'
'What's that?'
'How are you, Immanuel?'
'I'm sorry. How are you, Immanuel?'
'I'm  reasonably  OK,  thank  you,  Dad.  As  you  can  see.  There  was  a
kerfuffle,  that  was  what  happened.  Outside  the  Union.  There'd  been  a
debate - This  house  believes  that  Israel  has  forfeited  its  right  to  exist,  or
something along those lines. I was surprised, actually, that you hadn't been
invited to speak.'

So was Finkler, now that he'd come to hear of it.
'And . . .'
'And  you  know  what  these  things  are  like.  Tempers  got  a  little  frayed.

Words were exchanged, and the next thing fists were flying.'

'Are you hurt?'

Immanuel shrugged. 'My arm hurts, but I doubt it's broken.'
'You haven't been to the hospital?'
'No need.'
'Have you spoken to the police?'
'The police have spoken to me.'
'Have they charged anyone?'
'Yes. Me.'
'You!'
'Well, they're thinking about it, anyway. Depends on the other guys.'
'Why would they think of charging you? Has the world gone mad?'
At  that  moment  Blaise  came  into  the  room  with  coffee  for  them  all.

Finkler looked at her in wild alarm.

'I was there,' she said. 'Your mad son started it.'
'How do you mean "started it"?'
'This is not an oral examination, Dad,' Immanuel said from the bed. He
had gone back to reading his magazine. Let his father and his sister sort it
out. Her fault for calling him in the first place.

'Blaise, you told me there'd been an anti-Semitic incident. How do you
start  with  anti-Semites?  Do  you  jump  up  and  down  and  say  "I'm  a  Jew,
come and get me"?'

'He didn't have a go at anti-Semites. You have it the wrong way round.'
'What are you saying, the wrong way round?'
'They were Jews.'
'Who were Jews?'
'The people he picked a fight with.'
'Immanuel picked a fight with Jews?'
'They were Zionists. The real meshuggeners with black hats and fringes.

Like settlers.'

'Settlers? In Oxford?'
'Settler types.'
'And he picked a fight with them? What did he say?'
'Nothing much. He accused them of stealing someone else's country . . .'
She paused.
'And?'
'And practising apartheid . . .'
'And?'
'And slaughtering women and children.'

'And?'
'There is no and. That's all.'
'That's all? That's all he said? Immanuel, you said all this?'
Immanuel looked up. He reminded Finkler of his late wife, challenging
him.  He  had  that  same  expression  of  ironic  unillusionedness  that  comes
with knowing a person too well. 'Yes, that's what I said. It's true, isn't it?
You've said as much yourself.'

'Not specifically, to a person, Immanuel. It's one thing to iterate a general

political truth, it's another thing to pick a fight with a person in the street.'

'Well, I'm not a philosopher, Dad. I don't iterate general political truths. I
just told them all what I thought of them and their shitty little country and
called one of them, who came up to me, a racist.'

'A racist? What had he said to you?'
'Nothing. It wasn't about him. I was talking about his country.'
'Was he an Israeli?'
'How  do  I  know?  He  wore  a  black  hat.  He  was  there  to  oppose  the

motion.'

'Did that make him a racist?'
'Well, what would you call it?'
'I can think of other words.'
'I can think of other words, too. But we weren't playing Scrabble.'
'And then what happened?'
'And then I knocked his hat off.'
'You knocked a Jew's hat off.'
'Is that so terrible?'
'Jesus Christ, of course it's so terrible. You don't do that to anyone, least

of all a Jew.'

'Least of all a Jew! What? Are we a protected species now or something?

These are people who bulldoze Palestinian villages. What's a hat?'

'Did you hurt him?'
'Not enough.'
'This is a racist assault, Immanuel.'
'Dad, how can it be a racist assault when they're the racists?'
'I'm not even going to answer that.'
'Do I look like a racist? Look at me.'
'You look like a fucking little anti-Semite.'
'How can I be an anti-Semite? I'm a Jew.'

Finkler  looked  at  Blaise.  'How  long  has  this  shit  been  going  on?'  he

'How long has he been a fucking little anti-Semite? It comes and goes,

depending on what he's been reading.'

'Are  you  telling  me  this  is  my  fault?  He  won't  have  got  any  of  this

racist/apartheid crap from me. I don't go there.'

Blaise met his stare evenly. In her eyes, too, he saw his avenging wife.
'No, I'm not telling you that. I doubt he reads a word you write, actually.

But there are plenty of other people he can read.'
'I also have a mind of my own,' Immanuel said.
'I doubt that,' Finkler said. 'I doubt you can call what you've got a mind at

asked.

all.'

Had he known how to do such a thing, and had he not made a solemn
promise to Tyler, he would have pulled his son off the bed and broken his
other arm.

2

As  Assistant  Curator  of  the  Museum  of  Anglo-Jewish  Culture,  Julian
Treslove did not exactly have too much on his plate. It would be different
when  it  was  up  and  running,  Hephzibah  assured  him,  but  in  these  early
stages it was all about architects and electricians. The best Treslove could
do for the museum, and for her, was ruminate. Think of who and what else
they should be honouring. A suggestion which she no sooner made than she
regretted.  It  wasn't  fair  to  him.  Jews  might  have  been  possessed  of  a
crowded almanac of Jewish event, a Jewish Who's Who extending back to
the  first  man  and  woman,  but  Treslove  couldn't  be  expected  to  know  in
every instance Who Was and Who Was Not, Who Had Changed His Name,
Who Had Married In or Out. What is more he would have no instinct for it.
Some things you cannot acquire. You have to be born and brought up a Jew
to  see  the  hand  of  Jews  in  everything.  That  or  be  born  and  brought  up  a
Nazi.

The museum was housed in a high-Victorian Gothic mansion built on the
design  of  a  Rhineland  fortress.  It  had  pointed  gables,  mock  castellations,
fantasy chimneys and even a rampart you couldn't get out on to. To the side
was  a  pretty  garden  in  which  Hephzibah  imagined  they  would  one  day
serve teas.

'Jewish teas?' Libor had asked.
'What's a Jewish tea?' Treslove wondered.
'It's like an English tea only there's twice as much of it.'
'Libor!' Hephzibah scolded him.
But  the  idea  of  serving  specifically  Jewish  afternoon  teas  appealed  to
Treslove  who  had  learned  to  call  cakes  kuchen,  and  crepes  stuffed  with
cream or jam blintzes.

'Let me write the menu,' he said. And Hephzibah agreed he could.
His only worry was that the location of the museum would prohibit the
sort  of  passing  trade  you  needed  for  a  successful  tea  garden,  or  for  a
museum,  come  to  that.  It  was  only  a  short  walk  from  the  Beatles'  old
studios but it wasn't a walk you would naturally take. Parking would not be
easy. There were yellow lines everywhere, and because of the slight incline
in the road on which the Rhineland fortress had been built buses laboured at
that very spot, distracting motorists who might have been searching for the
museum. Plus there were overhanging trees.

'People just won't see it,' he warned Hephzibah. 'Or they'll crash looking.'
'Well, that's helpful,' she said. 'What would you like me to do, have the

Or did he imagine that, too?
 

Though he was sensitive to condescension, Hephzibah's suggestion that the
best thing he could do for her right now was ruminate suited him just fine.

road flattened?'

down the traffic.

Treslove  saw  himself  standing  outside  in  his  curator's  uniform,  waving

He had another worry which he chose not to express. Vandalism. It was
licensed  hereabouts.  Just  about  everyone  who  visited  the  Abbey  Road
Studios  wrote  messages  on  the  outside  walls.  Mostly  these  were  good-
natured - So-and-So loves so-and-so, We all live in a yellow submarine, Rest
in peace, John! - but one day when Treslove was passing he noticed a new
aerosoled graffito in Arabic script. Perhaps it too was a message of love -
Imagine  there's  no  countries,  it  isn't  hard  to  do  -  but  what  if  it  was  a
message of hate - Imagine there's no Israel, imagine there's no Jew . . .?

That he had no reason to suppose any such thing, he knew. Which was
partly  why  he  kept  his  suspicions  to  himself.  But  the  Arab  script  looked
angry. It was like a scribble over everything else that had been written on
the walls, a refutation of the spirit of the place.

There  was  much  to  think  about  and  he  was  happy  to  think  about  it  in  a
semi-professional capacity. Sometimes he thought about it at home, in an
office  Hephzibah  had  made  for  him  from  a  room  where  she  stored  the
Hampstead Bazaar shawls she had essentially finished with but didn't quite
want to throw away. (Treslove was pleased to observe that when it came to
a choice between him and the shawls, the shawls lost.) At other times he
thought  about  what  there  was  to  think  about  in  the  as-yet-unfinished
museum library - the advantage of that being the access he had to Jewish
books. The disadvantage being the hammering of carpenters and the suspect
graffiti he had to read on the way.

In the end he stayed in the shawl room. Or sat and read on the terrace
with its view of Lord's. And to the left, a few buildings along, a view of a
synagogue, or at least a view of its courtyard. He had hoped he would see
bearded  Jews  singing  and  dancing  here,  carrying  their  children  on  their
shoulders,  ceremonially  cutting  their  hair  in  the  way  he'd  seen  in  a
television  documentary,  or  arriving  solemnly  for  a  festival,  their  prayer
shawls under their arms, their eyes turned towards God. But it seemed not
to  be  that  sort  of  synagogue.  Either  he  looked  at  the  wrong  times,  or  the
only  person  using  the  synagogue  was  a  burly  Jew  (he  looked  like  Topol,
that's how Treslove knew he was a Jew) who came and went on a big black
motorbike. Treslove didn't know if he was the caretaker - he had too much
swagger for a caretaker - or the rabbi - but he didn't look much like a rabbi
either.  It  wasn't  just  the  motorbike  that  counted  against  the  rabbi
proposition, it was the fact that he wore a PLO scarf which he would wind
around  his  face,  like  a  warrior  going  into  battle,  before  putting  on  his
helmet and roaring off on his bike.

Day after day, Treslove sat on the terrace and looked out for the Jew on
the motorbike. This became so obvious that day after day the Jew on the
motorbike  looked  out  for  Treslove.  He  glowered  up,  Treslove  glowered
down. Why was he wearing a PLO scarf, Treslove wanted to know. And not
just wearing it but swathing himself in it as though it and it alone defined
his identity. In a synagogue!

Treslove  accepted  that  under  Libor's  tutelage  he  had  grown  obsessive
about the PLO scarf. It frightened him. Whatever its innocent origins as a
headdress  ideally  suited  to  a  cruel  climate  -  Abraham  and  Moses,
presumably,  would  have  worn  something  like  -  it  had  taken  on  a  huge
symbolic significance, no matter that the PLO was now, as Libor explained

to him, the least of Isrrrae's worries. To wear it was to make an aggressive
statement, regardless of the rights and wrongs of the situation. Fine, if you
were a Palestinian, Libor always said; a Palestinian had a right under all the
laws  of  grievance  to  his  aggression.  But  on  an  Englishman  it  only  ever
denoted  that  greed  for  someone  else's  cause,  wedded  to  a  nostalgia  for
simplicities  that  never  were,  that  was  bound  to  make  a  refugee  from  the
horrors  of  leftism  shudder.  So  Treslove,  who  was  a  refugee  only  from
Hampstead, shuddered along with him.

But this ageing biker who couldn't wait to muffle himself in a PLO scarf
was  not  just  one  more  English  ghoul  feeding  on  the  corpses  of  the
oppressed, he was a Jew, and what is more he was a Jew who seemed to
have made his home in a Jewish house of prayer! Explain that, Libor. But
Libor couldn't. 'We have become a sick people,' was all he said.

In the end Treslove had no choice but to ask Hephzibah, whom he had

'Oh, I make a point of never looking there,' she told him when he at last

mentioned what he'd been watching for the last however many weeks.

She  made  the  place  sound  like  Sodom,  which  one  cast  an  eye  over  at

wanted to spare.

one's peril.

'Why?' he asked. 'What else goes on there?'
'Oh, I doubt anything goes on. But they do parade their humanity a bit.'
'Well, I'm all for humanity,' Treslove was quick to make clear.
'I  know  you  are,  darling.  But  the  humanity  they  parade  is  largely  on

behalf of whoever isn't us. By us, I mean . . .'

Treslove  waved  away  her  awkwardness.  'I  know  who  you  mean.  But
couldn't they do that without going so far as to wear that scarf? Can't you
want better of your own without actually cheering on your enemy? By your,
I mean . . .'

She kissed the back of his head. Meaning, he had a lot to learn.
 

So he sat at home and tried to learn it. He felt that Hephzibah preferred it
that way, not having him under her feet in the museum. And he preferred it
that  way  too,  guarding  the  apartment  while  she  was  out,  being  a  proud
Jewish  husband,  breathing  in  the  smell  of  her,  waiting  for  her  to  come
home,  sighing  a  bit  with  the  excess  weight  she  carried,  her  silver  rings
jingling like a belly dancer's on her fingers.

He  liked  the  hopeful  way  she  would  call  his  name  the  moment  she  let
herself in. 'Julian! Hello!' It made him feel wanted. When the others used to
call his name it was in the hope that he was out.

It  was  a  relief  to  hear  her.  It  meant  he  could  call  it  a  day  with  his
education.  He  wished  he  had  done  a  module  or  two  in  Jewish  Studies  at
university.  Perhaps  one  on  the  Talmud,  and  one  on  the  Kabbalah.  And
maybe  another  on  why  a  Jew  would  wear  a  PLO  scarf.  Starting  from
scratch was not easy. Libor had suggested he learn Hebrew and was even
able to recommend a teacher, a remarkable person almost ten years older
than he was and with whom he sometimes enjoyed a leisurely lemon tea at
Reuben's restaurant on Baker Street.

'By leisurely I mean it takes him three hours to drink it through a straw,'
Libor explained. 'He taught me the little Hebrew I know in Prague before
the Nazis turned up. You'll have to go to him, and you might not be able to
understand much of what he's telling you, his accent is still pretty thick, he
came from Ostrava originally - he certainly won't be able to hear you, by
the way, so there's no point in your asking him anything - and you'll have to
put up with the odd neck spasm - his, I mean, not yours - and he'll cough
over you a lot, and maybe even shed a tear or two, remembering his wife
and children, but he speaks a beautiful classical pre-Israeli Hebrew.'

But Treslove considered Hebrew, even if he could find someone to teach
him who was still alive, to be beyond him. It was more history he wanted.
In the history of ideas sense. And the knack of thinking Jewishly. For this
Hephzibah recommended Moses Maimonides' The Guide for the Perplexed.
She hadn't read it herself, but she knew it to be a highly regarded text of the
twelfth century, and since Treslove owned himself to be perplexed and in
need of a guide, she didn't see how he could do any better.

'You're sure you don't just want me out of your hair?' he checked, once
he'd seen the contents page and the size of the print. It looked like one of
those  books  which  you  started  as  a  child  and  finished  in  an  old  persons'
home lying in a bed next to Libor's Hebrew teacher.

'Look, as far as I'm concerned you're perfect as you are,' she told him. 'I

love you perplexed. This is what you keep saying you want.'

'You sure you love me perplexed?'
'I adore you perplexed.'
'What about uncircumcised?'
It was a subject to which he frequently returned.

me.'

'How often must I tell you,' Hephzibah told him. 'All that's immaterial to

'All that?'
'Immaterial.'
'Well, it isn't exactly immaterial to me, Hep.'
He offered to talk to someone. It was never too late. She wouldn't hear of

it. 'It would be barbaric,' she said.

'And if we have a son?'
'We aren't planning to have a son.'
'But if we do?'
'That would be different.'
'Ah, so what would be good for him, would not be good for me. Already,

there are competing criteria of maleness in this house.'

'What's maleness got to do with it?'
'That's my question.'
'Well, go and get yourself an answer from some higher authority. Read

Moses Maimonides.'

He dreaded getting so far with Maimonides and then suddenly hitting that
blank wall of incomprehension that awaited him at about the same point,
even at about the same page, in every work of philosophy he had ever tried
to read. It was so lovely, bathing in the lucidities of a thinker's preliminary
thoughts, and then so disheartening when the light faded, the water turned
brackish, and he found himself drowning in mangrove and sudd. But this
didn't happen with Maimonides. With Maimonides he was drowning by the
end of the first sentence.

'Some  have  been  of  opinion,'  Maimonides  began,  'that  by  the  Hebrew
zelem,  the  shape  and  figure  of  a  thing  is  to  be  understood,  and  this
explanation led men to believe in the corporeality [of the Divine Being]: for
they thought that the words "Let us make man in our zelem" (Gen. i. 26),
implied that God had the form of a human being, i.e., that He had figure and
shape, and that, consequently, He was corporeal.'

Of  themselves,  Treslove  believed  he  might  have  made  some  headway
with  these  refined  distinctions  relating  to  the  appearance,  or  not,  of  the
divine, but first he had to ascertain the exact status of the word zelem and at
that  point  he  was  among  the  mystics  and  the  dreamers.  OK,  literally  the
word meant what Maimonides said it meant, an image or a likeness, but it
had  a  strange  disquieting  sound  to  Treslove's  ear,  almost  like  a  magic

incantation,  and  when  he  tried  to  track  down  those  with  whose  'opinion'
Maimonides  was  arguing  -  for  one  needed  to  know  the  extent  of  one's
perplexity  in  order  to  be  guided  out  of  it  -  he  found  himself  in  a  world
where commentary was piled upon commentary, striations of reference and
disagreement as old as the universe itself - until there was no knowing who
was arguing with whom, or why. If man was indeed made in the zelem of
God, then God must have been incomprehensible to Himself.

This religion is too old for me, Treslove thought. He felt like a child lost

in a dark forest of decrepit lucubrations.

Hephzibah noticed that a mood of despondency had fallen on him. She
put it down at first to his not having enough to do. 'Another few months and
we'll be up and running,' she said.

What  exactly  Treslove's  responsibilities  were  going  to  be  when  the
museum was up and running had never properly been discussed. Sometimes
Treslove  imagined  he  would  be  a  sort  of  Anglo-Jewish  culture  maitre  d',
welcoming people to the museum, showing them the way to the exhibits,
explaining what they were looking at - the Anglo as well as the Jewish -
exhibiting  in  himself  that  spirit  of  free  unschismatic  enquiry  and  cross-
cultural interchange the museum existed to foster. And it was possible that
Hephzibah had not progressed beyond that idea herself.

The  question  of  what  precisely  Treslove  was  for  -  whether  in  the
professional,  the  religious  or  indeed  the  marital  sense  -  remained  to  be
addressed.

'Everything all right between you?' Libor had asked his great-great-niece

early on.

said.

'Perfect,' she had told him. 'I believe he loves me.'
'And you?'
'The same. He needs a bit of looking after, but then so do I.'
'I'm very fond of you both,' he said. 'I want you to be happy.'
'We should be half as happy as you and Aunt Malkie were,' Hephzibah

Libor patted her hand and then fell vacant.
Hephzibah was worried about him. But as Treslove noticed the day she
helped him with the Four Questions, worrying over men came naturally to
her. It was another of those Finkler traits that he admired. Finkler women
knew that men were fragile. Just Finkler men or all men? He wasn't sure.
But he was the beneficiary of her concern either way. Seeing him in low

spirits, she would gather him into her arms, graze him accidentally with her
rings - it hurt, but what the hell! - and hide him away in her shawls. The
symbolism  wasn't  lost  on  him.  When  his  actual  mother  had  found  him
downcast  she  would  peck  him  on  the  cheek  and  give  him  an  orange.  It
wasn't love he'd lacked, it was envelopment. Wrapped around in Hephzibah
he knew true peace. It was better there - inside her in the non-erotic sense,
though  it  wasn't  without  its  eroticism  -  than  anywhere  he'd  ever  been
before.

'You're not having second thoughts?' she asked, seeing him slumped in an

armchair looking heavenwards.

'About us, absolutely not.'
'About what then?'
'Yours is a tough religion,' he said.
'Tough? It's you that's always saying how full of love we are.'
'Intellectually tough. You keep going off into metaphysics.'
'I do?'
'Not you specifically, your faith. It does my head in, as one of my sons

says, just don't ask me which.'

'That's because you insist on understanding it. You should try just living

it.'

'But I don't know what parts to live.'
'Maimonides not helping?'
He pulled a weary face. 'I guess no one ever promised that the process of

being unperplexed would be easy.'

But secretly he wondered if the task was beyond him. He felt sorry for
Hephzibah. Had he passed himself off as something he could never be? He
was  in  danger  of  reverting  to  type  and  picturing  only  one  end  to  this  -
Hephzibah  dying  in  his  arms  while  he  told  her  how  much  he  adored  her.
Verdi and Puccini played in his head, even as he ploughed on with Moses
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed  became  a  romantic  opera  for
him, ending the way all the operas he loved ended, with Treslove onstage
alone, sobbing. Only this time as a Jew.

That's if he ever made it as a Jew.
He stumbled blindly from one chapter to another. 'Of the divine Names
composed  of  Four',  'Twelve  and  Forty-two  Letters',  'Seven  Methods  by
which  the  Philosophers  sought  to  Prove  the  Eternity  of  the  Universe',

'Examination  of  a  passage  from  Pirke  di-Rabbi  Eliezer  in  reference  to
Creation'.

And  then  he  got  on  to  circumcision  and  found  himself  galvanised  into

thought.

intercourse.'

'As regards circumcision,' Maimonides had written, 'I think that one of its

objects is to limit sexual intercourse.'

He read it again.
'As regards circumcision, I think that one of its objects is to limit sexual

And then again.
But we don't have to follow him through every reading.
As a matter of course he read every sentence of Maimonides a minimum
of three times, but that was to seek clarity. Here was no obfuscation in need
of  conscientious  penetration.  Circumcision,  Moses  Maimonides  argued,
'counteracts excesssive lust', 'weakens the power of sexual excitement' and
'sometimes lessens the natural enjoyment'.

Such a claim merited reading and rereading simply for itself. And indeed
for himself, if he was ever to get to the bottom of who Finklers were and
what they really wanted.

Among  the  many  thoughts  that  crowded  into  Treslove's  mind  was  this
one: did it mean he'd been having a better time than Finkler - Sam Finkler
himself  -  all  along?  At  school  Finkler  had  boasted  of  his  circumcision.
'With one of these beauties you can go for ever,' he had said. And Treslove
had  countered  with  what  he'd  read,  and  with  what  made  perfect  sense  to
him,  that  Finkler  had  lost  the  most  feeling  part  of  himself.  A  verdict  in
which Moses Maimonides unequivocally concurred. Not only had Finkler
lost the most feeling part of himself, it had been taken from him precisely in
order that he should not feel what Treslove felt.

A great sadness, on behalf of Tyler, suddenly welled up in him. He had
enjoyed  her  more  than  Finkler  had.  No  question  of  it.  He  had  the
wherewithal to enjoy her more with.

But did it follow from that that she had enjoyed him more than she had
enjoyed Finkler? He had not thought so at the time. 'No woman will want to
touch  yours,'  Finkler  had  warned  him  at  school,  and  Tyler's  apparent
reluctance to look at him seemed to bear that out. But was it a reluctance or
was it a kind of holy dread? Did she fear to look upon what gave her so
much pleasure? Had he been a godhead to her?

For  what  gave  him  more  pleasure  must  surely  have  given  her  more
pleasure  too.  A  man  made  reluctant  by  his  circumcision  would  logically
communicate that reluctance to his partner. The 'weakened power of sexual
excitement'  had  to  work  both  ways.  What  counteracted  'excessive  lust'  in
the  one  had  to  counteract  'excessive  lust'  in  the  other,  else  there  was  no
point  in  it.  Why  maim  the  man  to  limit  sexual  intercourse  if  the  woman
went on demanding it as fervently as ever?

Indeed, Maimonides said as much. 'It is hard for a woman, with whom an
uncircumcised  had  sexual  intercourse,  to  separate  from  him.'  Women  had
not  found  it  hard  to  separate  from  Treslove,  but  that  could  have  been
attributable  to  other  causes.  And  initially  he  had  always  done  reasonably
well - 'If you think I'm going to let you fuck me on our first date you've got
another think coming,' they had said to him, letting him fuck them on their
first date - which suggested it was what they later discovered about him as a
person that was the problem, not the prepuce.

He felt possessed of a thrilling power he had never known was his. He

was the uncircumcised. From whom women found it hard to separate.

Physically  hard  to  separate,  did  Maimonides  mean,  in  that  the
uncircumcised  somehow  knotted  inside  the  woman  like  a  dog?  Or
emotionally, in that the uncircumcised's untiring lustfulness besotted her?

Both, he decided.
He was the uncircumcised, and he had spoken. Both.
In retrospect, he fell in love with Tyler all over again, knowing now that
she  must  have  loved  him  more  than  she  could  ever  admit.  And  had  been
afraid to look upon that which made her wanton.

Poor Tyler. Besotted with him. Or at least besotted with his dick.
And poor him for missing out on that exquisite knowledge at the time.
If only he'd known.
If only he'd known, what then? He wasn't sure. Just if only he'd known.
But it wasn't all regret. He was also excited by this discovery of his own

erotic power. Lucky Hephzibah at least.

Unless his untiring lustfulness both wearied and disgusted her. And as a

matter of ethno-religious principle she would have preferred him snipped.

3

He rang Finkler.

'You ever read Moses Maimonides?' he asked.
'Is that the purpose of your call?'
'That and to enquire how you are.'
'I've been better, thank you.'
'And Moses Maimonides?'
'I guess he's been better too. But have I read him? Of course. I count him

as among my inspirations.'

'I didn't think you found Jewish thought inspiring.'
'Then  you  think  wrong.  He  teaches  how  to  make  abstruse  thought
available  to  the  intelligent  layman.  He  is  all  along  saying  more  than  he
appears to say. We plough the same furrow, he and I.'

Oh  yeah,  Treslove  thought  -  Guide  for  the  Perplexed  and  John  Duns

Scotus and Self-Esteem: a Manual for the Menstruating.

But  what  he  said  was,  'So  what  do  you  reckon  to  what  he  says  about

circumcision?'

Finkler  laughed.  'Why  don't  you  just  come  right  out  with  it,  Julian?
Hephzibah wants you to have it done - yes? Well, I wouldn't stand in her
way. But between ourselves - ha! - I think you might be a wee bit old. As I
recall, Maimonides warns against it past the eighth day. So that's you out.
Just.'

'No, Hephzibah does not want me to have it done. She loves me as I am.
Why  would  she  not?  Maimonides  says  circumcision  limits  sexual
intercourse. I impose no limits myself.'

'I am pleased to hear it. But is this about you or Moses Maimonides?'
'It's  not  about  me.  I  simply  wonder  what  you,  as  a  philosopher  who

ploughs the same furrow, think about Maimonides' theory.'

'That  circumcision  is  to  put  a  brake  on  sex?  Well,  it  certainly  exists  to

make us afraid, and making us afraid of sex is part of it.'

'You always told me Jews enjoyed sex inordinately.'
'Did  I?  That  must  have  been  a  long  time  ago.  But  if  you're  asking  me
whether  circumcision  as  a  means  of  inhibiting  the  sexual  impulse  is
specifically  Jewish,  I  would  say  not.  Anthropologically  speaking,  it  isn't
primarily about sex anyway, except in so far as all initiation ceremonies are
about sex. It's about cutting the apron strings. What is Jewish is interpreting
the  circumcision  rite  in  the  way  Maimonides  does.  It's  he  -  the  medieval
Jewish  philosopher  -  who  would  wish  us  to  be  more  restrained  and

imagines circumcision as the instrument. But I have to tell you it has never
worked on me.'

'Never?'
'Not  ever  that  I  recall.  And  I  think  I  would  recall  it.  But  I  do  know
someone who believes himself to have been cheated of pleasure, and is in
the process of having the operation reversed.'

'You can have it reversed?'
'Some  people  think  so.  Read  Alvin  Poliakov's  blog.  You  can  find  it  at
something  like  www.ifnotnowwhen.com.  Alternatively  I  can  fix  you  up
with  an  introduction.  He's  perfectly  affable,  wants  to  talk  about  nothing
else, and might even show you his dick if you ask him nicely. Apparently
it's progressing. He's halfway to not being a Jew any more.'

'He's one of your ASHamed Jews, presumably.'
'Sure is. You don't get more ashamed than that.'
'You're not ashamed of yours, then?'
'You think I should be?'
'Just asking. You carried it with pride at school.'
'I was probably trying to rile you. I just carry it, Julian. I am a widower.
Being  circumcised  or  not  does  not  figure  high  among  my  concerns  right
now.'

'I'm sorry.'
'Don't be. I'm pleased for you that your life is dickcentric at the moment.'
'I'm only speaking philosophically, Sam.'
'I know you are, Julian. I expect nothing less of you.'
Treslove remembered one more question before he rang off. 'As a matter

of interest,' he asked, 'are your boys circumcised?'

'Ask them,' Finkler said, putting down the phone.
 

He had more conversational joy with Libor.

Libor's fears that he would see less of Treslove now that he was no longer
single had been unfounded. Any change was in Libor himself. He ventured
out  less.  But  he  would  still  occasionally  take  a  taxi  to  Hephzibah's
apartment in the afternoon when Hephzibah was at the museum and the two
of them would sit at the kitchen table together drinking white tea.

They  both  liked  it  that  the  ghost  of  Hephzibah  boiling  up  a  witches'
coven of cauldrons in which to cook a single egg inhabited the space. They

breathed  her  in  and  smiled  at  each  other  with  the  knowledge  of  her,
incorrigible wifelovers that they were.

Libor was now walking with a stick. 'It's come to this,' he said.
'It suits you,' Treslove said. 'It suggests old Bohemia. You should get one

with a blade in the handle.'

'To protect myself against the anti-Semites?'
'Why you? I'm the one who gets attacked.'
'Then you get a stick with a blade in it.'
'Speaking of which,' Treslove said, 'where do you stand on circumcision?'
'Uncomfortably,' Libor said.
'Has it been a problem to you?'
'It would have been a problem to me had it been a problem to Malkie.

But she never said anything. Should she have?'

'It hasn't stopped you enjoying sex?'
'I  think  what  you  carry  around  would  have  stopped  me  enjoying  sex.
Don't  get  me  wrong  -  on  you  I'm  sure  it  looks  wonderful,  but  on  me  it
wouldn't  have  looked  so  good.  Aesthetically  I  have  nothing  to  complain
about. I look the way I'm supposed to look. Or I did. It is aesthetics we're
talking?'

'No,  not  really.  I've  been  reading  that  circumcision  reduces  sexual

excitation. I'm canvassing opinion.'

'Well, it will certainly reduce yours if you decide to have it done at your
age. As for me, I have never known any different. And I've never thought to
complain. To be candid with you, I wouldn't have wanted to be any more
sexually  excited  than  I've  been.  It's  been  plenty,  thank  you.  In  fact,  more
than enough. Does that answer your question?'

'Yes, I suppose it does.'
'You only suppose it does?' He saw Treslove looking at him narrowly. 'I

know what you're thinking,' he said.

'What am I thinking?'
'You're thinking I protest too loudly. Had I not been circumcised, you're
thinking, I wouldn't have found it so easy to resist Marlene Dietrich. You're
too  polite  to  say  so  but  you're  wondering  whether  it  was  only  God's
covenant with Abraham that kept me away from the Hun.'

'Well, you have always claimed you were the most faithful of husbands,

despite facing temptations most men can't begin to comprehend . . .'

'And  you're  asking  if  it  was  having  a  desensitised  penis  that  kept  me

faithful?'

'I would never put it so grossly, Libor.'
'Except that you just have.'
'Forgive me.'
Libor sat back in his chair and rubbed his head. A melancholy smile from

somewhere very far away lit up his face. An old smile.

'This is my own fault,' he said. 'Perhaps I've been too anxious to promote
a particular view of myself, and perhaps you've been too ready to believe it.
I ask this one favour of you: in the report you give of me when I am gone,
speak of me as a loving husband but don't make me too chaste. Allow me at
least one errant little fuck.'

 

'Regarding that errant little fuck,' he said before he left. He wanted Treslove
to understand that he'd been thinking and worrying about what he'd said.

'Yes?'
'It's for Malkie, too, I ask it.'
Treslove blushed. 'Are you telling me that Malkie . . .?'
'No,  not  that  I  would  ever  know  or  want  to  know.  I  mean  it's  her
reputation,  too,  I  ask  you  to  protect.  A  woman  shouldn't  be  married  to  a
totally faithful man all her life.'

'Why not?'
'It demeans her.'
Treslove  blushed  again,  this  time  for  himself.  'I  don't  understand  that,

Libor kissed his cheek and said no more.
But Treslove read his silence. 'You don't understand because you're not

Libor,' he said.

one of us,' he read.

4

As a rule, Hephzibah took a shower the moment she returned home from
the museum. It was still something of a building site over there and she was
unable to relax until she had washed the dust and the grime from her. She
would shout to Treslove to let him know she was home, and either he would
pour a glass of wine for them both - she liked the gesture of his pouring for

her but she rarely touched a drop - or, if he was more Priapus than Bacchus
that evening, he would join her in the shower.

It  wasn't  always  what  she  wanted.  A  shower  was  a  private  place  to
Hephzibah, not least as she took up most of the available room in it. But she
was careful not to rebuff Treslove's ardour, and was sometimes grateful for
the massage he would give her when it became plain that she was looking
for nothing else.

'Oh, that's good,' she would say, and he enjoyed feeling her back relax

under his fingers in the hot spray.

There was something about the way she pronounced the word 'good', in
reference to whatever he was doing to her - whether in the phrase 'Oh, that's
good', or 'Oh, that's so good', or 'That's good of you' or 'You're very good to
do that' - that made Treslove feel he had found his niche as a man.

As a man?
Well, he knew that she was always just a fraction away from saying, as
he was just a fraction away from hearing, 'Who's a good boy?' A rhetorical
question  beloved  of  dogs  and  children.  He  made  no  bones  about  this  to
himself. She ran the show, and he was happy with the arrangement. But it
wasn't only the mother or the dog walker that he looked up to in her. It was
- not to allow this to become too fanciful - the creative Jewish force: if you
like,  the  Creator  herself.  And  God  called  the  dry  land  Earth;  and  the
gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was
good.

Good in that sense was what Treslove heard when Hephzibah praised his
efforts.  Good  meaning  more  than  good  -  good  meaning  congruent,
perfected, harmonious.

Good as an expression of the absolute rightness of the universe.
He  had  been  a  man  of  misadventures  and  now  he  was  a  man  of
congeniality. Everything fitted. He was a good man in a good world. With a
good woman.

What was good about her kept changing the longer he was with her. He
had thought of it as a Finkler thing at first. A matter of fecundity, though
not in the offspring sense. A fecundity of affection and loyalty, a fecundity
of friends and family, a fecundity of past and future. Alone, Treslove felt
himself  spinning  pointlessly  around  the  universe  like  a  fragment  of  a
forgotten planet. Hephzibah was his firmament. His Finkler firmament. He
had a place in her. He felt populous in her orbit.

Whether  this  was,  after  all,  a  Finkler  thing  he  didn't  know.  Drop  the
Finkler, then. What she was to him was humanly important, whatever that
meant. And he idolised her for it. The sun did not shine out of her, the sun
was her.

So go tell him he wasn't Jewish.
 

'I haven't finished telling you.'
'Then tell me.'

And then one evening she came home, sat down at the kitchen table, not
only asked him for a drink but drank it, and burst into tears.

He went to put his arms around her but she gestured him away.
'My God,' he said, 'what is it?'
She  covered  her  face  and  shook,  though  whether  it  was  with  grief  or

laughter he couldn't tell.

'Hep, what is it?'
When  she  showed  him  her  face  he  still  couldn't  tell  if  something  too

terrible to express had happened, or something laughable beyond words.

She collected herself, requested another glass of wine - the wine really
did disturb him: two glasses of wine was for Hephzibah a year's ration - and
told him.

'You know the oak doors that have just been fitted? Perhaps you don't.
They're  the  external  doors  to  the  side  entrance.  To  where  your  tea  rooms
will eventually be. I showed you photographs of the brass handles which
we've had made to resemble shofars - rams' horns - remember? Right, well,
don't get a shock, but they've been defaced. It must have happened while I
was  inside  with  the  architect  late  this  afternoon  because  they  were  fine
when I popped out for lunch, but when I left the building tonight, there it
was, or rather there they were. I mean, for fuck's sake, Julian, why would
anyone do that? Why?'

Swastikas,  Treslove 

the  swastikas
reappearing  everywhere.  He  had  told  Finkler  about  them  and  Finkler  had
said  ring  me  back  when  they're  killing  Jews  in  the  streets  again.  Fucking
swastikas!

thought.  He  had  read  about 

'So what were they?' he asked. 'Painted on?'
He dreaded hearing blood. Blood and faeces were favourite. Blood and
faeces  and  sperm.  Hephzibah  had  already  received  a  couple  of  letters
written in blood and shit.

'It was bacon.'
'It was what?'
'It was bacon. They - I'm assuming they - had wrapped rashers of bacon

around the handles. Two or three packets of them - so no expense spared.'

She seemed about to cry again.
He  went  over  to  her,  determinedly  this  time.  'That's  terrible,'  he  said.

'How vile!'

She shook behind her hands.
He  put  his  arms  around  her.  'Christ,'  he  said,  'who  are  these  people?  It

makes you want to kill them.'

It was then he realised she was laughing.
'It's only bacon,' she said.
'Only bacon?'
'I'm not saying it's nice. You're right, it's vile. The desire to do it is vile.
But it's such a feeble gesture. What do they think we're going to do? Pack
up and go home? Scrap the plans because of a few rashers of bacon? Sell
the site? Leave the country? It's too absurd. You have to see the funny side.'
Treslove  tried.  'I  suppose  you  do,'  he  said.  'Yes,  you're  quite  right.  It's

laughable.' And he tried a laugh as well.

Hephzibah  dried  her  tears.  'On  the  other  hand,'  she  said,  'it  makes  you
wonder what's going on out there. You read things like this happening in
Berlin in the twenties and you think why didn't they read the signs and get
out.'

'Perhaps because they never really believed them,' Treslove said. 'Perhaps

because they tried to see the funny side.'

He had turned solemn again.
Hephzibah sighed. 'In St John's Wood,' she said, 'of all places.'
'Nowhere's safe now,' Treslove said, remembering what had been done to

him, virtually on the doorstep of the BBC.

You Ju.
They both fell silent, each picturing the hordes of anti-Semites marauding

through the West End of London.

Then Hephzibah began to laugh. She saw the rashers of bacon wrapped
painstakingly around the ram-horn handles. And the plugs of meat and fat,
which she hadn't got round to telling him about, stuffed into the keyholes of
the  doors.  She  imagined  the  vandals  going  into  Marks  &  Spencer  and
buying what they needed, paying at the till, perhaps using a reward card,

and  then,  like  vigilantes,  vigilantes  armed  with  bacon,  the  greatest
defilement  they  could  conceive,  descending  on  the  Museum  of  Anglo-
Jewish  Culture,  which  didn't  have  signs  up  yet,  and  so  which  strictly
couldn't even be said to exist.

'It isn't just their overestimation of our horror of the pig,' she said, wiping
her eyes. 'I'm sure, for example, they don't know how much I love a bacon
sandwich, but it isn't only that, it's their exaggeration of our presence. They
find us before we find ourselves. Nowhere is safe from them because they
think nowhere is safe from us.'

Treslove  couldn't  keep  up  with  the  fluctuations  of  her  feelings.  She
wasn't, he realised, going from fear to amusement and back again, she was
experiencing  both  emotions  simultaneously.  It  wasn't  even  a  matter  of
reconciling opposites because they were not opposites for her. Each partook
of the other.

He didn't know how to do what she did. He didn't possess the emotional
flexibility. And wasn't sure he wanted to. Wasn't there an irresponsibilty in
it?  It  was  as  though  he  were  to  laugh  at  the  moment  Violetta  dies  in
Alfredo's arms. A thought he found unthinkable even as he tried to think it.

Not for the first time in recent days, Treslove felt he'd failed a test.

NINE

1

Libor's mind was turning fetid. That was his own verdict.

In the first months following Malkie's death he had found the melancholy
of his mornings unbearable. He woke hoping to discover her. He imagined
he saw the sheets stir on her side of the bed. He spoke to her. He opened her
wardrobe  doors  and  imagined  helping  her  to  choose  clothes.  If  he  put  an
outfit together in his mind, perhaps she would emerge in it.

Everything  he  remembered  was  painful  by  virtue  of  its  sweetness.  But
now  the  pain  was  of  another  kind.  So  many  bad  things  had  happened  to
them, between them, as a consequence of them. He had angered her parents.
He had robbed her of a musical career. They had failed to have a child, no
unbearable  loss  for  either  of  them,  but  there'd  been  a  miscarriage  which
upset  them  precisely  because  it  didn't.  She  hadn't  travelled  to  Hollywood
with him, not liking aeroplanes or caring to make new acquaintances. The
only  company  she  wanted,  she  told  him,  was  his.  Only  he  interested  her.
But  now  he  came  to  think  of  it,  hadn't  that  been  awful  for  her,  and  an
intolerable  burden  on  him?  He  had  been  lonely  without  her.  He  was
subjected  to  temptations  he  would  have  overcome  with  less  ado  had  she
been  with  him.  And  he  dared  never  fail  her,  whether  as  an  indefatigable
companion who came home from his travels with wonderful stories to tell,
as a man who would return her love and show her it had not been wasted, or
as a husband bound at every turn to justify her complete confidence in him.
None  of  these  thoughts  turned  him  against  her.  But  they  changed  the
atmosphere around the memory of her, as though a golden halo had - no,
not slipped but darkened. This might be for the best, he thought. Nature's
way  of  helping  him  through.  But  what  if  he  didn't  want  to  be  helped
through? Who was nature to decide!

And worst of all were the black events he kept recalling, which had spoilt
their life together whether they'd known it at the time or not. There was a
Yiddish phrase his parents had used and which he thought meant 'long ago'.
Ale shvartse yorn - all the black years. All those black years were now their
black years - his and Malkie's. The events that marred them were the anti-

myths  of  their  romance,  peopled  by  monsters,  proving  that  they  had  not
lived in paradise together at all, but - through no fault of their own - in a
place that was more like hell.

Jews.  For  Libor 

Malkie's parents, the guttural Hofmannsthals, had been property-owning
German 
-  whose  politics  were  hopelessly,
Czechoslovakianly  confused  -  this  made  them  on  two  accounts  the  worst
kind of Jews of all. They had been so disappointed in her choice of husband
they had all but disowned her, treating Libor as though he were dirt beneath
their feet, refusing to attend their wedding, demanding he stay away from
every family function, including funerals. 'What do they think I'm going to
do, dance on their graves?' he asked her.

They were right to worry. He would have.
And what was his sin? Being too poor for her. Being a journalist. Being a

Sevcik, not a Hofmannsthal, being a Czech Jew, not a German Jew.

They  couldn't  entirely  disown  her.  They  had  to  will  their  property  to
someone.  They  left  her  a  small  block  of  flats  in  Willesden.  Willesden!
Anyone  would  have  thought  from  their  exclusivism,  Libor  thought,  that
they  were  aristocracy,  and  all  they  were  were  fucking  landlords  of  some
run-down flats in Willesden.

'It's  a  good  job  I'm  Jewish,'  he  told  Malkie,  'otherwise  your  lot  would

have turned me Fascist.'

'They might have liked you more had you not been Jewish,' Malkie said,

meaning had he only been a musician or had property of his own.

'So what did Horowitz have? A dacha in Kiev?'
'He had fame, darling.'
'I have fame.'
'Wrong sort. And you didn't have any sort when I married you.'
But  if  he  despised  her  German  parents  and  their  property  he  despised
even  more  their  tenants  on  account  of  whom  he  and  Malkie,  as  property
owners  themselves  now,  had  no  choice  but  to  soil  their  souls  with
commerce. Here was every sort of mean, malingering, whining and thieving
human  nature.  These  tenants,  to  whom  he  would  not  in  any  other
circumstance have given shelter, not so much as a cardboard box, knew the
letter of every law that might indulge them while breaking every other law
there was. They fouled the space they inhabited while they lived there, then
stole from it with a minute pettiness - every switch and bulb, every latch
and handle, every thread from every carpet - when they left.

Get rid of the whole block was his advice, it isn't worth the vexation. But
she  felt  it  tied  her  to  her  parents.  They  had  made  their  lives  again  in
London, and to have sold Willesden would have been to wipe their history
out  a  second  time.  'A  dirty  money-grubbing  Jew,'  the  tenants  called  her
when she did not flinch before their menace. And they were right in that
she'd been grubbed and dirtied by her contact with them.

Human  vermin,  Libor  thought,  lover  of  the  English  though  he  was.
Except that vermin probably honoured their habitations more. Now, in his
imagination he conflated these tenant troubles with Malkie's illness, though
she had long before done what Libor had suggested and sold them off. How
dared they call a woman in her frail health such names! How horrible for
her that at such a time she had to encounter the human animal at its most
repugnant.  All  the  black  years.  Yes,  they'd  been  happy  together.  They'd
loved each other. But if they thought they'd escaped contamination they'd
fooled themselves. It was as though black spiders crawled across the belly
of his beautiful beloved Malkie as she slept in the filthy earth.

He called up Emmy and asked her to have breakfast with him. She was
surprised by the request. Why breakfast? In the morning, he explained, I am
at my blackest. And the advantage to me in that? she wondered. None, he
said. It's for me. She laughed.

They met at the Ritz. He had dressed up for her. David Niven as he lived
and breathed. But with the sad defeated Prague Spring smile of Alexander
Dubcek.

'You aren't wooing me here again?' she asked.
There was no reason not to. She was an elegant woman with good legs
and Libor had no vows or memories to protect. The past was infested with
black  spiders.  But  he  was  curious  about  her  use  of  the  words  'here'  and
'again'.

'This was where you brought me last time.'
'For breakfast?'
'Well, for bed and breakfast. I see you have forgotten.'
He apologised. He was about to say it had escaped his memory, but the
expression sounded wrong for the occasion, as though his memory was a
captor of good times. An idea which she could construe as insulting, if he
had allowed this good time to get away.

'Gone,' he said, touching his head. 'Like just about everything else.'

Had he really brought her here for bed and breakfast? How could he have
afforded the Ritz all those years ago in his impoverished pre-Malkie days?
Unless it was not as long ago as that, in which case . . . In which case it
were better all memory of it had gone.

Yet how could it have gone?
She gave him time to think what he was thinking - it wasn't hard to tell
what he was thinking - then enquired as to the progress of his bereavement
counselling.

Bereavement  counselling?  Then  he  remembered. 

'Gone,'  he  said,

touching his head again.

'I've  asked  you  here,'  he  said,  not  giving  her  time,  'one,  because  I'm
lonely and wanted the company of a beautiful woman, and two, in order to
say that I can't do anything.'

She didn't understand.
'I can't do anything about your grandson. Or about that anti-Semite film

director. Or whatever else. I can't do anything about any of it.'

She smiled him an understanding smile, putting the fingers of her well-
looked-after hands together. Her rings flashed fire under the chandeliers. Ah
well. 'If you can't, you can't,' she said.

'Can't and won't,' he said.
She started back as though he'd made to hit her.
A Russian couple at the next table turned to stare at them.
'Won't?'
Libor  stared  back  at  the  Russians.  Clinking  oligarch  and  pale-painted

prostitute. But when had Russians ever been anything else?

You  don't  sit  next  to  a  citizen  of  Prague  if  you  are  a  Russian  and  you

know what's good for you, Libor thought.

'Won't because there is no point,' he said, turning back to Emmy. 'This is

how things are. And maybe how things should be.'

He  was  surprised  himself  by  what  he  said,  heard  his  words  as  though
someone else were speaking them, but still he knew what this other person
meant. He meant that as long as there were Jews like Malkie's parents in the
world, there would be people to hate them.

Emmy  Oppenstein  shook  her  head  as  though  she  wanted  to  rid  Libor

from it.

'I'll go,' she said. 'I don't know what you want to punish me for - I assure
you  there  isn't  anything  either  of  us  has  done  that  warrants  it  -  but  I

understand  why  it  is  necessary  for  you  to  do  so.  I  hated  everyone  when
Theo died.'

She rose to leave but Libor stayed her. 'Just listen to me for five more

minutes,' he said. 'I don't hate you.'

He wondered if the Russians thought he too was an oligarch squabbling
with  his  prostitute,  never  mind  that  both  of  them  were  in  their  eighties.
What else could the Russian imagination conceive?

Emmy sat down. Libor admired her movements. When she rose from the
table  it  was  as  a  chief  justice  taking  leave  of  the  court.  Now  she  was
returned to deliver judgement.

But he admired in a part of his brain that wasn't working properly.
He  leaned  forward  and  took  her  hands.  'I  have  discovered  in  myself  a

profound necessity,' he said, 'to think ill of my fellow Jews.'

He waited.
She said nothing.
He would have liked to see fear or hatred in her eyes, but he saw only a

patient curiosity. Maybe not even curiosity. Maybe only patience.

'I don't wish ill on them, you understand,' he went on, 'I only think ill of
them.  Which  makes  it  difficult  for  me  to  care  what  happens  to  them.  It's
been  going  on  too  long.  What's  that  phrase  you  read  sometimes  in  the
papers - compassion fatigue, is it?'

She blinked her eyes at him.
'Except that it never was compassion that I felt. Compassion comes from
another  place.  You  can't  feel  compassionate  towards  yourself  or  towards
your own. It's more fiercely protective than that. When a Jew was attacked,
I was attacked. These are the generations of Adam . . . We go back to the
same father. I was my brother's keeper. But it's too long ago now. Too long
ago  for  us,  and  too  long  ago  for  those  who  aren't  us.  There  has  to  be  a
statute  of  limitation.  That's  enough  now  with  the  Jew  business.  Let's  not
hear  from  any  of  you  on  the  subject  again,  especially  from  you  Jews
yourselves. Have a bit of decency. Accept that when your time is up, your
time is up.'

He waited, as though to hear her make a speech of acceptance. Yes, Libor,

my time is up.

She let him wait. And then, in a lowered voice - the Russians, Libor, the
Russians  are  listening  -  she  said,  'But  what  you're  describing  is  not  what
you  call  "thinking  ill".  I  feared  you  were  going  to  say  we  get  what  we

deserve. That it is my grandson's fault that he is blinded. The logic of our
film director friend. A Jew dispossesses an Arab in Palestine, another Jew
must be blinded in London. What the Jewish people sow, the Jewish people
will reap. I don't think I hear you saying that.'

Now her hands were holding his.
'My dear wife's parents,' he said, 'who must have had something good in
their souls or they would not have produced her, were contemptible people.
I can tell you what made them contemptible, I can imagine circumstances
way back - let's say hundreds, let's say thousands of years ago - that would
have made them something else. But I can't go on making these allowances.
I can't go on telling myself that that American swindler who has just been
put in jail to serve a hundred life sentences is only coincidentally Jewish, or
that  bad-faced  business  Jew  we  see  on  television  who  brags  about  his
money  and  the  ruthlessness  of  his  pursuit  of  it  -  I  can't  convince  me,  let
alone  others,  that  it  is  only  by  chance  that  such  men  resemble  every
archetype  of  Jewish  evil  that  Christian  or  Muslim  history  has  thrown  up.
When Jews of this sort enjoy the eminence they do, how can we expect to
be left to live in peace? If we are back in the medieval world it is because
the medieval Jew himself is back. Did he even go away, Emmy? Or did he
survive  the  rubble  of  the  destruction  and  the  entombments  like  a
cockroach?'

She tightened her hold on his fingers, as though to squeeze this upsetting

ugliness out of him.

'I will tell you something,' she said. 'What you see is not what non-Jews
see.  Not  the  fair-minded  ones  and  most  of  them  are  that.  The  bad-faced
business Jew you refer to, assuming I know who you mean - and it doesn't
matter  because,  yes,  of  course  I  know  the  type  -  is  not  the  hate  figure  to
Gentiles  that  he  is  to  you.  Some  like  him,  some  admire  him,  some  don't
bother their heads about him one way or another. You might be surprised to
learn how few people see the archetypal Jew every time they see him. Or
even know that he's a Jew. Or care. You are the anti-Semite, not they. You're
the one who sees the Jew in the Jew. And cannot bear to look. This is about
you, Libor.'

He did her the justice of thinking about her words.
'I would not be so quick to see the Jew in the Jew,' he said at last, 'if the
Jew in the Jew were not so quick to show himself. Must he talk about his

wealth? Must he smoke his cigar? Must he be photographed stepping into
his Rolls?'

'We are not the only people to smoke cigars.'
'No, but we are the very people who should not.'
'Ah,' she said.
The  sound  carried  so  much  force  of  revelation  that  Libor  thought  he
heard  the  Russian  and  his  trollop  echo  it.  As  though  even  they  could  see
him now for what he was.

'Ah what?' he said. As much to them as to her.
'Ah, you have given the game away. It is you who say the Jew must live
his life differently to others. It is you who would segregate us in your head.
We have as much right to our cigars as anyone. You have the Yellow Star
mentality, Libor.'

He smiled at her. 'I have lived in England a long time,' he said.
'So have I.'
He allowed her that, before saying, 'You aren't, I hope, accusing me of
merely expressing hatred of myself. I have a clever friend of whom that is
true. And I am nothing like him. It doesn't pain me that Jews are lording it
for  a  brief  period  in  the  Middle  East.  I  am  not  one  of  those  who  is
comfortable only when Jews are scattered and under someone else's heel.
Which they will be again, anyway, soon enough. This is not about Israel.'

He  did  not,  with  Emmy,  treble  the  r  s  or  lose  the  l.  There  was  no

necessity.

'I know that,' she said.
'I cheer Israel,' he went on. 'It's one of the best things we've done these
last two thousand years, or it would have been had Zionism remembered its
secular credentials and kept the rabbis away.'

'Then go there. But you won't escape cigar-smoking Jews in Tel Aviv.'
'I  wouldn't  mind  them  in  Tel  Aviv.  Tel  Aviv  is  where  they  should  be
doing  it.  But  as  I  have  said,  this  is  not  about  Israel.  None  of  it  is  about
Israel. Not even what most of its critics say about Israel is about Israel.'

'No. So why do you bring it up?'
'Because I am not like my clever friend, the rabid anti-Zionist. I want to

think ill of Jews my way, and for my own reasons.'

'Well,  you  are  looking  backwards,  Libor.  I  must  look  forwards.  I  have

grandchildren to be concerned for.'

'Then  send  them  to  Sunday  school,  or  a  madrasa.  I  will  have  no  more

She shook her head and rose to leave. This time he didn't stop her.
It crossed his mind to ask her to go upstairs with him. It seemed a shame

Jews.'

to waste the Ritz.

But it was too late for all that.

2

On a night he lost in excess of two thousand pounds playing online poker,
Finkler went to find himself a prostitute. Perhaps Libor, sitting next to one,
had transmitted the thought to him by magic. They were close, no matter
that they disagreed about everything.

Finkler was not in need of sex, he was in need of something to do. The
only  arguments  against  going  with  prostitutes  that  had  ever  carried  any
weight with him, as a rational amoralist, were cost and the clap. A man is
free to do as he wishes with his body, but you don't impoverish or infect
your  family  in  the  process.  However,  when  you've  lost  two  thousand
pounds  playing  poker,  three  hundred  more  for  an  hour  with  a  decent-
looking prostitute is hardly going to make much difference, philosophically
speaking. And as for the clap - there was no one left he could infect.

There was another calculation he had to make. People knew his face. It
was  unlikely  the  prostitute  would.  Prostitutes  are  working  at  the  time
documentaries go out on television. But other men looking for prostitutes
might recognise him, and he knew he could not count on any solidarity of
the  fallen.  In  minutes  he  would  be  up  on  someone's  Facebook  as  having
been  seen  prowling  around  Shepherd  Market,  never  mind  that  the  person
who had seen him was out prowling himself.

He could have gone to the bar of one of the obvious Park Lane hotels,
where  the  pickup  was  more  discreet,  but  it  was  the  prowling  he  liked.
Prowling  mimicked  the  fruitless  search  for  the  hidden  face  or  memory
which was all the pursuit of sexual happiness amounted to. Prowling was
romance skinned to the bone. You could prowl and then go home empty-
handed  and  still  tell  yourself  you'd  had  a  good  night.  A  better  night  in
Finkler's  case,  since  he  couldn't  remember  ever  having  found  a  prostitute
he'd liked; but then what he liked was the hidden face or memory whose
function was to stay forever hidden. In fact, he wouldn't have said no to a

nice Jewish girl with Manawatu Gorge breasts, rather than another of those
slender  ice-pick  Polacks,  but  he  probably  wouldn't  have  said  yes  to  her
either.

Which made it safe for him, he thought, to prowl the streets. A man as
visibly lukewarm in his desires as he was ran only a minimal risk of being
suspected of looking for sex.

So he almost jumped out of his skin when he heard his name called.
'Sam! Uncle Sam!'
The wise thing would have been to ignore the call and keep on walking.
But he knew he had jerked his head at the sound of his name, and to have
gone on walking then would have been to invite suspicion. He turned round
and saw Alfredo standing outside the Market Tavern, at the edge of a crowd
of drinkers, sucking on a bottle of Corona.

'Hey, Alfredo.'
'Hey, Uncle Sam. You off somewhere special?'
'Depends what you call special.' Finkler looked at his watch. 'I have to

meet my producer any minute. Already a bit late.'

'This another telly series?'
'Well, early stages of.'
'What's this one?'
Finkler let his hands make circles of profound vagueness in the air.
'Oh, Spinoza, Hobbes, free speech, CCTV cameras, all that.'
Alfredo  took  off  his  sunglasses,  put  them  back  again,  and  rubbed  his
neck. Finkler could smell drink on his breath. Was he too out looking for a
prostitute? Finkler wondered. And was he drinking to get his courage up?

If  so  he'd  overdone  it.  No  prostitute  would  go  near  this  amount  of

'Do you know what I think about all this surveillance shit, Uncle Sam?'

courage.

Alfredo said.

we all are.'

things to you?'

Finkler  hated  it  when  Alfredo  Uncled  him.  The  sarcastic  little  shit.  He

looked at his watch. 'Tell me.'

'I think it's a blast. I hope we're being looked at by a camera now. I hope

'Why's that, Alfredo?'
'Because we're such lying, cheating, thieving bastards.'
'That's  a  very  bitter  analysis.  Has  someone  just  done  any  one  of  those

'Yes, my father.'
'Your father? What's your father done?'
'What hasn't my father done, you mean.'
Finkler wondered if Alfredo was going to fall over, so unsteady was he.
'I thought you were getting on with your father. Didn't you go on holiday

with him recently?'

'That  was  ages  ago.  And  haven't  heard  a  word  from  him  since,  though

now I hear he's moved in with a woman.'

'Hephzibah, yes. I'm surprised he hasn't told you. No doubt he means to.
Is your point that more cameras in the street would have caught him moving
in?'

'My point, Uncle Sam, my point, as you call it, is that my father, as you

call him, invites friendship one minute and doesn't speak to you the next.'

Finkler thought about saying he knew what Alfredo meant, but suddenly
didn't  relish  the  role  of  playing  proxy  father.  Let  Julian  sort  his  kids  out
himself. 'Julian's got a lot going on in his head at the moment,' he said.

'And a lot in his pants, too, from what I hear.'
'I must go,' Finkler said.
'Me too,' Alfredo said. He nodded, as though to say coming, coming, in
the direction of a group of young men, a couple of whom, Finkler thought,
were  wearing  Palestinian  scarves,  though  it  was  hard  to  tell  these  days,
given that many fashion scarves looked the same and were worn similarly.

He wondered if there'd been a demo earlier that day in Trafalgar Square.

If so, he wondered why he hadn't been invited to address it.

'Then I'll see you when I see you,' he said. 'Where are you playing at the

moment?'

'Here, there and everywhere.' He took Finkler's hand and drew him close.

'Uncle Sam, tell me - you're his friend - what's all this Jew shit?'

Slurred,  Jew  shit  came  out  sounding  more  like  Jesuit,  a  word  which
Alfredo would not have known even when sober. The other thing he seemed
not to know, or to have forgotten, was that Finkler was Jew shit himself.

'Why don't you ask him?'
'No,  but  listen  -  I  mean  altogether.  I've  been  reading  that  none  of  it

happened, you understand what I'm saying . . .'

'None of what, Alfredo?'
'That shit. Camps and all that. One big lie.'
'And where have you been reading that?'

'Books, you know. And friends have been telling me. There's this Jewish
boogie-woogie drummer I've been playing with.' Alfredo played air drums
with a pair of imaginary sticks, in case Finkler didn't know what a drummer
did. 'It's all bullshit, he says. So why would he say that if it isn't the truth?
He was like a soldier in the Israeli army or some shit and now he plays the
skins like Gene Krupa. He says it's all bullshit and lies so that we'll look the
other way.'

'Look the other way from what?'
'Whatever they're doing there. Concentration camps and shit.'
'Concentration camps? Where are there concentration camps?'
'Wherever, whatever. Nazis, fucking gas chambers, except that none of it

happened, right?'

'Happened where?'
'Israel, Germany, I don't fucking know. But it's all -'
'I  really  must,'  Finkler  said,  freeing  himself,  'Or  I'll  be  late  for  my

producer. But listen, don't believe everything people tell you.'

'What do you believe, Uncle Sam?'
'Me? I believe in believing nothing.'
Alfredo made to kiss him. 'That's two of us. I believe in believing nothing

either. It's all bullshit. Like that fucking hepcat says.'

He beat the air again with his sticks.
Finkler took a taxi home.

3

Strange,  how  well  you  can  come  to  feel  you  know  a  person,  Treslove
thought, from a name, a word, and a few photographs of his penis.

But  then  Treslove  could  afford  to  be  generous:  he  had  what  Alvin

Poliakov, epispasmist, had wanted all his life - a foreskin.

 

Epispamos,  Treslove  learned  from  Alvin  Poliakov's  blog,  is  foreskin
restoration.  Except,  as  Alvin  Poliakov  explains,  you  cannot  restore  a
foreskin. Once it's gone, it's gone. But it is not beyond the ingenuity of man
to conjure up a faux foreskin in its place. This, Alvin Poliakov sits in front
of a camera every day to prove.

For interest's sake, and by way of a break from Maimonides, and what
with Hephzibah being out often at the moment, attending to problems with
the museum, Treslove watches him.

Alvin Poliakov, son of a depressed Hebrew teacher, bachelor, bodybuilder,
one-time radio engineer and inventor, founder member of ASHamed Jews,
begins his morning by tugging at the loose skin on his penis, easing a little
more skin up the shaft. He does this for two hours, breaks for mid-morning
tea  and  a  chocolate  digestive  biscuit,  and  then  begins  again.  It  is  a  slow,
slow  process.  In  the  afternoon  he  takes  measurements,  collates  the
morning's data and writes his blog.

'I speak,' he confides to his readers, 'for the millions of mutilated Jews the
world  over,  who  feel  what  I  have  felt  all  my  life.  But  not  only  for  Jews,
because there are millions of Gentiles out there who have been circumcised
under  the  erroneous  medical  assumption  that  you  are  better  without  a
foreskin than with.'

He  doesn't  say,  the  Jews  misleading  the  world  again,  but  only  an
uncomplaining fool, happy to be unforeskinned, could miss the implication.
Alvin Poliakov writes the way cinema newsreel announcers of the 1940s
spoke, as though mistrustful of the technology and so shouting to be heard.
'Ever since the dawn of civilisation,' he says, 'men have sought to restore
what was stolen from them, in violation of their human rights, before they
were old enough to have a say in the matter. What has driven them to do
this is a sense of incompletion, a consciousness of something as disabling as
amputation.'

He  cites  the  anguish  of  Jews  in  classical  Greek  and  Roman  society,
longing to assimilate and strut their stuff but unable to go to the baths and
show  other  men  their  penises,  for  fear  of  encountering  mockery.  (How

many Jewish men actually wanted to do this? Treslove wonders.) This has
led  many  desperate  Jews  to  seek  a  remedy  in  surgery,  often  with  tragic
consequences. (Treslove shudders.) The only proven method of restoring an
at  best  passable  simulacrum  of  a  foreskin  is  the  one  the  blogger  himself
practises.
Behold.
Do not hope for too much. But do not settle for too little. This is Alvin

Poliakov's philosophy.

As for the methodology--
Procure  a  good  supply  of  sticky  paper,  surgical  adhesive,  office  tape
(Treslove finds himself thinking about the Sellotape with which Josephine,
the  mother  of  one  of  his  children,  he  was  not  sure  he  could  remember
which, repaired her boots), suspender straps, elastic bands, weights and one
strong wooden chair.

Every morning Alvin Poliakov photographs his penis from various angles
with a view to posting the photographs on the Web later in the afternoon,
along with diagrammatic details of the procedures he has followed in the
course of the day - the construction of cardboard collars, the application of
tape, the lubrication of sore skin, the hours spent slumped forward on his
wooden chair coaxing the skin downward, ever downward, and the system
of  weights  he  has  devised  using  copper  jewellery,  keys  from  a  children's
xylophone,  and  a  pair  of  small  brass  candlesticks,  which,  he  earnestly
explains,  can  be  bought  cheaply  from  any  good  market  or  shop  selling
Indian knick-knacks.

Like  a  monk  of  self-denial  he  sits,  shaven-headed,  pumped-up  and
muscled, with his head between his knees, a snake charmer who knows the
snake  will  not  show  himself  for  years,  that's  if  he  shows  himself  at  all.
There  is  no  lubricity  in  the  procedure.  Whatever  sex  there  once  was  in
Alvin Poliakov's head has long since vanished in the service of the tapes,
the adhesives, the collars and the weights. It was because he felt cheated of
pleasure that Alvin Poliakov embarked on this course, but pleasure is not
the issue any longer. Jews are the issue.

As  an  accompaniment  to  the  photographs  and  the  diagrams,  Alvin
Poliakov  appends  a  daily  portion  of  tirade  against  the  Jewish  religion  in
whose anti-service, so to speak, he now expends his energies. The crime of
sexual  mutilation,  he  argues,  is  just  one  more  of  the  countless  offences
against humanity to be laid at the gates of the Jews. Every day he publishes

the name of another Jewish child, just come into the world, whose integrity
has  been  compromised  and  whose  rights  to  a  full  complement  of  sexual
activities have been tragically curtailed.

Where these names come from, Treslove cannot imagine. Have they been
lifted  from  the  births  and  deaths  pages  of  Jewish  news-papers?  It  is
impossible to imagine that the guilty parents would have given them to him.
In which case isn't Alvin Poliakov himself guilty of stealing from the child
what the child is too young to give freely?

Or has he just made them up?
Imperturbable,  for  he  cannot  hear  Treslove's  objections  and  would  not
heed them if he could, Alvin Poliakov, breathing like an athlete, coaxes the
skin of his penis into a foreskin. Every evening he believes he can see one
coming, but every morning it is as though he must start again. Except for
those nights when he attends meetings of ASHamed Jews, he does not leave
the  house.  An  elderly  sister  does  the  shopping  for  him.  She  has  recently
converted to Catholicism. It is not clear whether she is aware of how her
brother passes his days, but he is not a man to keep his causes to himself.
And she must wonder what he is doing on his wooden chair, tugging at his
penis. Though it is possible she misinterprets.

He  listens  to  the  radio,  noting  how  rarely  the  sufferings  of  mutilated
Jews,  or  Gentiles  mutilated  as  proxy  Jews,  are  referred  to.  That  the  BBC
has a pro-Jewish bias he does not have the slightest doubt. Why else is there
so little heard from those whose lives have been destroyed by Zionists and
circumcision?

He  wrote  an  afternoon  play  about  one  such  life  himself.  But  the  BBC,

though it thanked him for it, has not put it on. Censorship.

This barbarous ritual, Alvin Poliakov maintains, is analagous to cutting
off  young  men's  hair  before  enrolling  them  in  the  army,  and  serves  an
identical function. It is to destroy individuality and subjugate every man to
the tyranny of the group, whether religious or military. There is irrefutably,
therefore, in Alvin Poliakov's view, a direct link between the Jewish ritual
of  circumcision  and  Zionist  slaughter.  The  helpless  Jewish  baby  and  the
unarmed  Palestinian  become  one  in  the  innocent  blood  that  Jews  do  not
scruple to take from both.

While  he  is  sitting  with  his  head  between  his  knees,  Alvin  Poliakov
thinks up dedications to the victims of Zionist brutality. He likes to post a
new  dedication  whenever  he  can,  above  the  latest  photograph  of  his

 

brutalised  penis,  thereby  hammering  home  the  connection.  On  the  day
Treslove decides he won't continue any longer with the blog, the dedication
above  Alvin  Poliakov's  penis,  from  which  weights  of  assorted  sizes  and
materials hang, reads: To the mutilated of Shatila, Nebateya, Sabra, Gaza.
Your struggle is my struggle.

'Put it this way,' Treslove said, describing the blog to Hephzibah who had
declined his offer to email her the link, 'if you were a Palestinian -'

'Absolutely. With friends like him . . .'
'But not just that. It's the appropriation-'
'Absolutely.'
'And in such a trivial cause.'
'Not trivial to him, though, clearly.'
'No, but all other questions aside, aren't Muslims circumcised anyway?'
'As far I know they are,' she said, turning away, not wishing to encourage

him in this new interest.

'So . . .?'
'Yes, precisely,' she said.
'And yet this Alvin Poliakov receives commendations at least purporting

to be from Palestinians.'
'How do you know?'
'He posts them.'
'Darling,  you  mustn't  believe  everything  you  read  on  the  Internet.  But
even if they're genuine it's understandable. We all turn a blind eye to one
issue for the sake of another. And these are desperate people.'

'Isn't everybody?'
She told him to close his eyes. Then she kissed them.
'You aren't.'
He thought about it. No, he wasn't desperate. But he was agitated.
'This is weird stuff,' he said. 'It makes me feel unsafe.'
'You unsafe?'
'Everybody unsafe. What if ideas are like germs? What if we are all being
infected?  This  Alvin  Poliakov  -  hasn't  he  been  infected  somewhere  along
the line?'

'Take no notice,' she said. She was beginning to prepare supper, getting

pans out. 'The man's a meshuggener.'

'How can you take no notice? The work of a meshuggener or not, this
stuff  circulates.  It  comes  from  somewhere.  It  goes  somewhere.  Opinion
doesn't evaporate. It stays in the universe.'

'I  don't  think  that's  true.  We  don't  as  a  society  believe  today  what  we
believed  yesterday.  We  have  abolished  slavery.  We  have  given  votes  to
women. We don't bait bears in the public streets.'

'And Jews?'
'Oh, darling, Jews!'
With which she kissed his eyes closed again.

4

She  liked  him.  She  definitely  liked  him.  He  was  a  change  for  her.  He
seemed without ambition, a lack she had not encountered in her husbands.
He  listened  to  her  when  she  talked,  which  the  others  hadn't.  And  he
appeared to want to be with her, keeping her in bed in the morning, not for
sex - not only for sex - and following her around the apartment when she
was in, which could have been irritating yet wasn't.

But  there  was  a  tendency  to  sudden  gloom  in  him  which  worried  her.
And more than that a hunger for gloom, as though there wasn't enough to
satisfy him in his own person and he had come to suck out hers. Was that, at
bottom, all that his Jewish thing was really about, she wondered, a search
for  some  identity  that  came  with  more  inwrought  despondency  than  he
could  manufacture  out  of  his  own  gene  pool?  Did  he  want  the  whole
fucking Jewish catastrophe?

He wasn't the first, of course. You could divide the world into those who
wanted to kill Jews and those who wanted to be Jews. The bad times were
simply those in which the former outnumbered the latter.

But it was a bloody cheek. Jews proper had to suffer for their suffering;
and  here  was  Julian  Treslove  who  thought  he  could  just  nip  on  the
roundabout whenever the fancy took him and feel immediately sick.

And she wasn't even sure he liked Jews as much as he claimed to. She
didn't  doubt  his  affection  for  her.  He  slept  inside  her  skin  and  kissed  her
with gratitude the minute he awoke. But she couldn't be the all-in-all Jewess
to him he wanted. For a start she wasn't, at least in her own view, anything
like Jewish enough. She didn't open her eyes to the world and say Hello,
here  comes  another  Jewish  day,  which  she  had  a  feeling  was  what  Julian

wanted her to say and hoped he would soon start saying on his own behalf.
Hello, here comes another Jewish day, except that . . .

The 'except that' was half the stuff she tried on his insistence to initiate
him into. 'I want the ritual,' he had told her, 'I want the family, I want the
day-to-day tick-tock of the Jewish clock,' but he was no sooner given it than
he  backed  away.  She  had  taken  him  to  synagogue  -  not,  of  course,  the
synagogue  next  door  where  they  prayed  in  PLO  scarves  -  and  he  hadn't
liked it. 'All they do is thank God for creating them,' he complained. 'But
what's the point of being created if all you do with your life is thank God
for it?'

She  had  taken  him  to  Jewish  weddings  and  engagements  and  bar
mitzvahs  but  he  hadn't  liked  those  either.  'Not  serious  enough,'  was  his
complaint.

'You want them to be thanking God more?'
'Maybe.'
'You are hard to please, Julian.'
'That's because I'm Jewish,' he said.
And  though  he  raved  like  a  madman  about  Jewish  family  and  Jewish
warmth, the moment she introduced him to her family, he fell silent in their
company - Libor excepted - and behaved as though he hated them, which he
assured her he didn't, and generally embarrassed her by his lack of - well,
warmth.

'I'm shy,' he said. 'I am abashed by the vitality.'
'I thought you liked the vitality.'
'I love the vitality. I just can't do it. I'm too nebbishy.'
She  kissed  him.  She  was  always  kissing  him.  'A  nebbish doesn't know

he's a nebbish,' she said. 'You aren't a nebbish.'

He kissed her back. 'See how subtle that is,' he said. ' "A nebbish doesn't
know he's a nebbish." It's too sophisticated for me. You're all too quick on
your feet.'

'Have to be,' she said. 'You never know when you might be packing your

bags.'

know he's schlepper?'

'I'll carry them. That's my role. I'm the schlepper. Or doesn't a schlepper

'Oh,  a  schlepper  knows  he's  a  schlepper  all  right.  Unlike  a  nebbish,  a

schlepper is defined by his knowledge of himself.'

He kissed her again. These Finklers! Here he was, as good as married to
one.  Almost  one  himself.  In  his  heart  one,  certainly.  Only  in  his  practice
deficient. And yet there still seemed so far to go.

'Don't ever leave me,' he said. He wanted to add, 'Don't go first. Promise
me  you  won't  go  first.'  But  he  remembered  that  those  had  been  Malkie's
words  to  Libor,  and  to  have  reproduced  them  would  have  struck  him  as
sacrilege.

'I'm not going anywhere,' she said. 'Unless they make me.'
'In which event,' he told her, 'I'll be your schlepper.'
 

He had not yet introduced her to his sons. Why was that? His explanation to
her,  since  she'd  with  good  reason  asked  for  one,  was  that  he  didn't  much
care for them.

'So?'
'So why would I want them to come into contact with you for whom I do

much care?'

'Julian, that is a nonsense in more ways than I have sufficient breath in
my body to tell you. Perhaps if you met them with me you would like them
more.'

'They are a part of my life I want to be done with.'
'You told me you were done with them before you'd even met them.'
'That's true. And that's the part of my life I want to be done with - being

She wondered if that were true.
She couldn't tell if he wanted a child by her. He'd raised the matter in the
course  of  one  of  his  interminable  circumcision  conversations  -  was  he
beautiful enough for her, was there too much of him, was he too sensitive,
what would they do if they had a son, would he be like his father or like
Moses? - but it had all been highly hypothetical and more about him than a
child.  She  wasn't  thinking  children  herself.  'No  hurry,'  she'd  told  him.
Which was a nice way of saying 'no interest'. But would he see that as a

done with people.'

done with them again.'

indifference to me.'

'And how does not introducing them to me ensure that?'
'It wouldn't work out. You wouldn't like them. And then I'd have to be

'Are you sure you don't think it's they who wouldn't like me?'
He  shrugged.  'They  might  not.  Who  cares?  It's  a  matter  of  profound

failure  between  them?  By  his  own  account  he  was  the  worst  father  in
history. He told her that again and again in a way that made her wonder if
he wanted to prove he could do better.

She asked him.
'What, be a Jewish father this time? I don't think so. Unless you . . .'
'No, no, absolutely not. It was you I was . . .'
As  for  the  Jew  thing  in  general,  it  had  struck  her  as  amusing  to  begin
with but now concerned her. Had he come to suck that out of her along with
her gloom? It worried her that he confused the two.

'Jews can be joyous, you know,' she told him.
'How can I forget that when I met you at a Pesach dinner?'
'Well that wasn't joyous in the way I mean. Remembering when we were
slaves  in  Egypt.  Maybe  I've  used  the  wrong  word.  I  mean  boisterous,
vulgar, earthy.'

As she said it she realised she had been less any of those things since she
had  met  him.  He  constrained  her.  He  wanted  her  to  be  a  certain  kind  of
woman and she didn't want to let him down. But on some nights she would
have  preferred  watching  a  soap  opera  on  television  to  discussing
circumcision or Moses Maimonides. It was a strain being a representative
of your people to a man who had decided to idealise them. It wasn't only
him she didn't want to let down; it was Judaism, all five thousand troubled
years of it.

'Then let's do something boisterous,' he said. 'There's a klezmer band with
Jewish dancing on at the Jewish Cultural Centre down the road. Why don't
we go there?'

'I think I'd rather have your baby,' she said.
'Would you?'
'Joking.'
She could hear his mind whirring. How does telling someone you would

like to have his baby constitute a joke for Jews?

But the other side of all this was that she didn't want to worry him. The
bacon  smearers  had  been  back.  This  time  they  had  painted  Death  to
Jewishes  on  the  walls.  Jewishes  was  Muslim  hate  talk.  There  were  more
and  more  reports  of  small  children  being  abused  as  Jewishes  in  mixed
schools.  Hephzibah  considered  this  a  far  more  seriously  menacing
development  than  the  swastikas  with  which  white  thugs  defaced  Jewish
cemeteries. There was an idle half-heartedness in swastikas. It was more a

memory of hate than hate itself. Whereas Jewishes! - the word had a terrible
ring to it, to her. Jewishes were creeping things. They were made low and
viscous by their faith. If you trod on them their Jewishesness would ooze
out of them. It was an abuse that went far deeper than Yid or kike. It was
directed not at individual Jews but at Jewish essence. And of course it came
from a part of the world where the conflict was already soaked in blood,
where hatreds were bitter and perhaps ineradicable.

Libor, too, had been telling her things she would rather not have known.
Passing stories of violence and malice on to her as though that was the only
way  he  could  empty  his  own  system  of  them.  'Do  you  know  what  the
Swedish papers are saying?' he asked her. 'They are saying Israeli soldiers
kill  Palestinians  in  order  to  sell  their  organs  on  the  international  organ
market. Remind you of anything?'

Hephzibah bit her lip. She had been through this already at work.
But Libor didn't have colleagues he could exchange fears with. 'It's the

blood libel,' he told her, as though she needed telling.

'Yes, Libor,' she said.
'They've  got  us  feasting  on  blood  again,'  he  said.  'And  they've  got  us
making big money out of it. We could be back living in the Middle Ages.
But  then  what  else  can  you  expect  from  Swedes  who  have  never  left  the
Middle Ages!'

She didn't want to hear but she heard it every day. The roll-call of Jewish

crimes. And the roll-call of answering acts of violence.

Only the other day a security guard at a Jewish museum in Washington
had  been  shot.  This  sent  a  little  shock  of  fear  through  all  those  who  ran
Jewish  public  institutions.  Emails  of  anxious  solidarity  began  to  be
exchanged.  They  were  fair  game  -  that  was  the  consensus.  There  was  no
stopping a lunatic striking anywhere, of course. But there was much in the
currency of contemporary Israel-hating for lunatics to latch on to. There had
been spillage, from regional conflict to religious hatred, there could be no
doubt of that. Jews were again the problem. After a period of exceptional
quiet,  anti-Semitism  was  becoming  again  what  it  had  always  been  -  an
escalator that never stopped, and which anyone could hop on at will.

In keeping this from Treslove, not mentioning the guard who had been
shot, not telling him about the emails, not passing on what Libor told her -
though  it  was  not  impossible  Libor  was  telling  him  himself  -  Hephzibah
recognised  that  she  was  protecting  him  as  she  would  have  protected  a

parent or a child. Though more a parent, in that she was being careful of
Jewish susceptibilities. She would have done the same for her father had he
been alive. 'Don't tell your father, it will kill him,' her mother would have
said. Just as her father would have said, 'Don't tell your mother, it will kill
her.'

That's  what  Jews  did.  They  kept  terrible  news  from  one  another.  And

now she was doing it with Treslove.

5

Finkler, who did not dream, had a dream.

People were punching his father in the stomach.
It  had  been  friendly  at  first.  His  father  was  in  the  shop,  entertaining
customers. Go on, harder, harder. Do I feel anything? Not a tickle. And I
had a cancer there two years ago. Impossible to believe, I know, but true.
Ha ha!

But then the atmosphere had changed. His father wasn't joking any more.
And his customers weren't laughing with him. They had forced him to the
floor  of  his  shop  where  he  lay  among  ripped  cartons  of  sunglasses  and
punctured  cases  of  deodorant  spray.  The  shop  always  looked  as  though
there had just been a delivery. Boxes remained unopened on the floor for
weeks. Toothbrushes and babies' dummies and combs and home perms lay
where they had fallen or simply been left where the suppliers had placed
them.  'Who  needs  shelves  when  you've  got  a  perfectly  good  floor?'  the
comedian-chemist would say while grubbing about on his hands and knees,
wiping whatever it was that a customer had asked for on his lab coat. It was
his  theatre,  not  a  pharmacy.  He  performed  there.  But  this  time  the  chaos
was not of his own making. Those people not punching him were pulling
things  from  the  shelves.  Not  looting  them,  just  throwing  them  about  as
though they were not worth stealing.

They had knocked his fedora off too, though in real life he never wore it

in the shop. His fedora was for going to the synagogue in.

Finkler, concealed in a corner of his dream, waited for his father to call

for help.

cry for help came.

Samuel, Samuel, gvald!
He was curious about himself, curious to see what he would do. But no

It was when the kicking started that Finkler woke.
 

He hadn't even been in bed. He had fallen asleep in front of his computer.

He was anxious about the following day. He had a speaking engagement
with Tamara Krausz and two others in a hall in Holborn. The usual subject.
Two against, two for. Normally he did these in his sleep. But his sleep was
not a good place for him at the moment. He knew what he would say at the
public meeting. And there was little to fear from those who opposed him.
Or  from  the  audience.  Audiences  were  hungry  to  hear  what  Finkler  told
them, whatever the subject, on account of his being on television, but in the
matter  of  Palestine  they  were  as  empty  buckets.  That  didn't  mean  they
hadn't  made  their  minds  up.  They  had.  But  they  sought  Finkler's
confirmation.  A  thinking  Jew  attacking  Jews  was  a  prize.  People  paid  to
hear that. So nothing to agitate him there. It was Tamara Krausz who made
him jumpy.

He  didn't  trust  himself  with  her.  He  didn't  mean  romantically.  She  was
more Treslove's kind of woman than she was his. He remembered his friend
running off a list of all the fraught women he had fallen for. They sounded
like the string section of a women's orchestra, or rather a women's orchestra
that had nothing but a string section in it. His nerves vibrated just listening
to  Treslove's  descriptions.  'Not  for  me,'  he'd  said,  sucking  his  teeth.  Now
here he was allowing Tamara Krausz to run her bow across his spinal cord.
He wondered if there was any way he could ask her to leave him alone.
She  would  deny,  of  course,  that  she  had  done  anything  to  him.  He  was
flattering  himself  if  he  supposed  she  as  much  as  noticed  him  as  a  man
outside  his  professional  capacity  as  fellow  ASHamee.  She  had  made  no
play  for  him.  If  he  imagined  her  screaming  in  his  arms,  the  drama  was
entirely of his own making.

True,  as  far  as  it  went,  but  the  screaming  he  anticipated  was  not  to  be
confused with the sounds a vain man fancies he can coax out of a sexually
frustrated  woman.  The  screams  he  heard  in  advance  of  Tamara  Krausz
actually  screaming  them  were  ideological.  Zionism  was  her  demon  lover,
not  Finkler.  She  could  not,  in  her  fascinated,  never  quite  sufficiently
reciprocated  hatred  of  Zionism,  think  about  anything  else.  Which  is  how
things are when you're in love.

Finkler's fault, if Tamara had only to say 'West Bank' or 'Gaza' to set his
nerves  on  edge.  Finkler's  fault,  if  the  word  'occupation'  or  'trauma'  on

if  by 

Tamara Krausz's inappositely submissive lips - moist like a harlot's in the
middle  of  her  small,  anxious  face  -  inflamed  him  almost  to  madness.  He
knew  what  would  happen 
some  mischance  or  mutual
misunderstanding  they  ended  up  in  bed  together  and  she  screamed  the
dialectic  of  her  anti-Zionism  in  his  ear  -  he  would  come  into  her  six  or
seven times and then kill her. Slice off her tongue and then slit through her
throat.

Which  might  have  been  the  very  thing  she  was  referring  to  when  she
spoke  of  the  breakdown  of  the  Jewish  mind,  the  Final  Solution  causing
Jews  to  go  demented  and  seek  final  solutions  of  their  own,  the  violence
begot of violence. Indeed, Finkler would have done no more than illustrate
her thesis.

Was  this  not  the  very  thing  she  sought?  Kill  me,  you  demented  Jew

bastard, and prove me right.

The  strange  thing  about  all  this  was  that  she  had  not  yet,  either  in  his
hearing, or in any article of hers that he had read, said a word with which he
disagreed.  She  was  more  sold  on  psychic  disintegration  than  he  was,  and
more trusting of Israel's enemies - Finkler felt able to inveigh against the
Jewish state without having to make friends with Arabs: as a philosopher he
found human nature flawed on both sides of every divide - but otherwise
their diagnoses concurred at every point. It was the way she put it that irked
and  excited  him.  It  was  the  rise  and  fall  of  her  voice.  And  it  was  her
methodology, which was to quote whoever said something that supported
her, and then to ignore them when they said something different.

Again as a philosopher, Finkler was bound to condemn such a practice. It
was the totality of a person's thought one should adduce in argument, not
stray  bullets  of  opinion  that  just  happened  to  suit  yours.  This  made  him
wary of her personally, as well. You might inadvertently whisper something
to her about one subject which she would quote against you on another. I
can think only of you, I can hear only you, I can see only you, he might say
to  her  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  she  would  bring  it  up  it  at  an  ASHamed
Jews meeting as proof that his concentration had begun to wander and that
he was no longer single-minded in his commitment to the group.

It  felt  like  spite.  As  though  she  had  got  wind  of  something  the  Jewish
people had said about her - in the dorm after lights out - and was now hell-
bent, by fair means or foul, on paying them back.

He put on a black suit and a red tie. Normally he spoke from platforms in
an  open-necked  shirt.  On  this  occasion  he  wanted  to  be  formidable  in
appearance as well as content. Or maybe he was concerned to protect his
throat, confusing his with hers.

They  took  their  places  next  to  each  other  on  the  platform.  He  was
surprised to note how little of her there was below the desk; how short her
legs were, and how small her feet. As he inspected her legs he was aware of
her inspecting his. How long they are, she must have thought, and how big
his  feet.  She  made  him  feel  ungainly.  He  hoped  he  made  her  feel
insubstantial.

'They've dug out the most what they could find?' Finkler asked.
He'd heard but he wanted to hear again.
'The most hysterical.'
'Ah, hysterical . . . Are they hysterical?'

At the other end of the table were two establishment Jews. Men on the
boards  of  charities  and  synagogues,  watchdogs  of  the  community,
custodians of the Jewish family and the good name of Israel, and therefore
Finkler's  natural  enemies.  They  didn't  mix,  the  watchmen  Jews  and  the
insurrectionary Jews of questions and ideas. One of them reminded Finkler
of his father when he was out of the shop, praying or talking to other Jews
who  shared  his  communal  concerns.  He  had  that  same  look  of  worldly
acumen combined with an untried innocence that comes with believing that
God  still  took  a  particular  interest  in  the  Jewish  people.  Now  protecting
them  as  He  protected  no  one  else,  now  punishing  them  more  ferociously
than He punished any other of His creatures. The communal solipsism of
the  Jews.  They  blink  with  the  ongoing  wonder  of  it  all,  such  men,  while
driving a hard bargain.

Tamara Krausz leaned into him. 'I see they've dug out the most hysterical
ones they could find,' she whispered. Her contempt was like fine oil sliding
into his ear.

'Hysterical'  was  an  ASHamed  Jew  word.  Whoever  did  not  admit  to
shame had capitulated to hysteria. The charge went all the way back to the
medieval superstition of the effeminised Jew, the Jew who nursed a strange
and secret wound and bled as women bleed. The new hysterical Jew was as
a woman in that he was in a state of unmanly terror. Wherever he looked he
saw only anti-Semites before whom he quaked in his soul.

He felt that all the strings in his body had shrunk, so that if he twitched a

shoulder blade his fingers would retract and tighten into a fist.
She didn't have time to answer. The debate was under way.
Finkler  and  Tamara  Krausz  won  it,  of  course.  Finkler  argued  that  you
couldn't  wax  lyrical  about  one  people's  desire  for  nationhood  and  at  the
same time deny it to another. Judaism is essentially an ethical religion, he
said.  Which  made 
it  fundamentally  contradictory  at  heart,  pace
Kierkegaard, because it is impossible to be ethical and religious. Zionism
had been Judaism's great opportunity to escape its religiosity. To seek from
others what they wanted for themselves, and to give back in the same spirit.
But  with  military  victory,  Jewish  ethics  succumbed  once  more  to  the
irrational triumphalism of religion. Only a return to ethics could save the
Jews now.

Tamara  saw  it  somewhat  differently.  For  her,  the  Zionist  ideal  was
criminal  from  its  inception.  To  prove  this  she  quoted  people  who  mainly
believed  the  opposite.  The  victims  of  that  criminality  were  not  only  the
Palestinians, but Jews themselves. Jews everywhere. Even in this room. She
spoke coldly, as though defending a client she didn't quite believe in, until
she came to the question of 'what the West calls terrorism'. Then, as Finkler
sitting  next  to  her  noticed,  her  body  began  to  heat  up.  Her  lips  grew
swollen, as though from a demon lover's kisses. There is a kind of eroticism
in violence, she told the enthralled assembly. You can gather those you kill
to your heart. As you can gather those who kill you. But because the Jews
had loved the Germans too much, and gone passively to their deaths, they
had resolved against Eros, emptied their hearts of love, and now killed with
a coldness that chilled the blood.

Finkler  didn't  know  whether  this  was  poetry,  psychology,  politics  or
piffle.  But  all  the  talk  of  killing  discountenanced  him.  Had  she  somehow
guessed what he wanted to do to her?

The community Jews were no match for her. Which wasn't saying much.
They'd have been no match for a clown like Kugle. Had they been the only
speakers  they'd  still  have  contrived  to  lose  the  debate.  They  confounded
themselves. Finkler sighed as they went through routines that had been tired
when he first heard them from his father thirty or more years before - how
tiny Israel was, how long-standing were Jewish claims to the land, how few
of the Palestinians were truly indigenous, how Israel had offered the world
but every effort at peacemaking had been rebuffed by the Arabs, how much

more  necessary  than  ever  a  secure  Israel  was  in  a  world  in  which  anti-
Semitism was on the increase . . .

Why didn't they hire him to write their scripts? He could have won it for
them. You win by understanding something of what the other side thinks,
and they understood nothing.

He meant win in every sense. Win the argument and win the Kingdom of

It  was  his  oldest  argument  with  his  father:  that  Jews,  for  whom  the
stranger was supposed to be remembered and given water, for whom doing
unto  others  as  they  would  have  done  unto  them  was  the  virtue  to  end
virtues, had turned into a people with ears only for themselves. He couldn't
bear his father's clowning in the shop, but at least there he was a democrat
and humanitarian; whereas dressed in his black coat and his fedora, talking
politics on the way home from synagogue, he closed his face as resolutely
as he closed his mind.

'They fought and lost,' his father used to say. 'They would have thrown us

into the sea but they fought and lost.'

'That is no reason for us not to imagine what it is like to lose,' the young
Finkler argued. 'The prophets didn't say we had to show compassion only to
the deserving.'

'They get what they deserve. We give them what they deserve.'
And  so  Finkler  had  thrown  his  skullcap  away  and  shortened  his  name

from Samuel to Sam.

God.

'Same old, same old,' he muttered to Tamara.
'As I said - hysterical,' she answered in an undertone.
Finkler's fingers retracted so far he could feel his fists retreating into his

sleeves.

It  was  only  when  there  were  questions  from  the  floor  that  the  evening
became lively. People on both sides of the debate shouted and told stories of
a  personal  nature  which  they  mistook  for  proof  of  whatever  it  was  they
believed. A Gentile woman with a sorrowing face stood and in the manner
of a confessional told how she had been brought up to be in awe of what
Professor  Finkler  -  he  wasn't  a  professor  but  he  let  it  go  -  had  called  the
sublime Jewish ethic - he had said no such thing but he let that go as well -
but since then she had been to the Holy Land and discovered an apartheid
country ruled by racist supremacists. She had a question for the gentlemen
on  the  platform  who  complained  that  Israel  was  uniquely  singled  out  for

censure: what other country defines itself and those it permits to enter it on
racial grounds? Is the reason you are uniquely singled out for censure, that
you are uniquely racist?

'She  is  a  lesson  to  us,'  Tamara  Krausz  said  to  Finkler  in  her  silken
undertone.  It  was  like  listening  to  a  woman  you  didn't  want  to  love
removing her slip for you, Finkler thought.

'How so?' he asked.
'She speaks from the bruised heart.'
Was  it  that  that  made  Finkler  not  wait  for  the  gentlemen  to  whom  the
question had been put to answer it? Or was it his certain know-ledge that
they would answer it as ineffectually as they had answered everything else?
Finkler himself didn't know. But what he said he too said from a bruised
heart. The mystery was: whose bruised heart was it?

6

What Finkler said was this:

How dare you?
For a moment he said nothing else. It isn't easy to let a phrase hang in
silence at the noisy end of a public meeting when everyone is eager to be
heard. But Finkler, one time exhibitionistic Oxford don, now experienced
media  philosopher,  was  not  without  some  mastery  of  the  tricks  of
eloquence. As one-time beloved husband of Tyler, now grieving widower,
as one-time proud father, now not, as potential murderer of Tamara Krausz,
he was possessed of some of the tricks of gravity, too.

'How  dare  you?  was  unexpected  of  him  politically,  unexpected  as  a
response to the careworn woman who had once been a celebrant of Jewish
ethics and spoke now from the soul of suffering humanity, and unexpected
by the violence of its tone. A single pistol shot would not have carried more
threat.

He  allowed  the  report  of  it  to  go  on  reverberating  through  the  hall  -  a
tenth of a second, a half a second, a second and a quarter, a lifetime - and
then, in a voice no less shocking for the calm pedagogic reasonableness in
which he had cocooned it, he said:

'How dare you, a non Jew - and I have to say it impresses me not at all
that  you  grew  up  in  awe  of  Jewish  ethics,  if  anything  your  telling  me  so
chills me - how dare you even think you can tell Jews what sort of country

they may live in, when it is you, a European Gentile, who made a separate
country for Jews a necessity?

'By  what  twisted  sophistication  of  argument  do  you  harry  people  with
violence off your land and then think yourself entitled to make high-minded
stipulations as to where they may go now you are rid of them and how they
may  provide  for  their  future  welfare?  I  am  an  Englishman  who  loves
England,  but  do  you  suppose  that  it  too  is  not  a  racist  country?  Do  you
know of any country whose recent history is not blackened by prejudice and
hate against somebody? So what empowers racists in their own right to sniff
out racism in others? Only from a world from which Jews believe they have
nothing to fear will they consent to learn lessons in humanity. Until then,
the Jewish state's offer of safety to Jews the world over - yes, Jews first -
while it might not be equitable cannot sanely be construed as racist. I can
understand why a Palestinian might say it feels racist to him, though he too
inherits a history of disdain for people of other persuasions to himself, but
not you, madam, since you present yourself as a bleeding-heart, conscience-
pricked respresentative of the very Gentile world from which Jews, through
no fault of their own, have been fleeing for centuries . . .'

He  looked  around  him.  There  was  no  wall  of  applause.  What  did  he
expect? Some people enthusiastically clapped. Rather more booed. Had he
not carried the authority he did, there would, he presumed - he bloody well
hoped  -  have  been  cries  of  'Shame!'  A  demagogue  likes  to  hear  cries  of
'Shame!' But mainly what he saw was humanity trapped in conviction, like
rats in rat traps.

Those  who  saw  as  he  saw,  saw  what  he  saw.  Those  who  didn't,  didn't.

And the didn't had it.

Fuck it, he thought. It was at that moment the sum total of his philosophy.

He  turned  his  head  to  Tamara  Krausz.  'So  what  do  you  think?'  he

Fuck it.

enquired.

She had a strange smile on her face, as though everything he had just said

he had said at her bidding.
'Hysterical,' she told him.
'You  wouldn't  care  to  lie  in  my  arms  and  scream  that,  would  you?'  he

asked, in his most inviting manner.

TEN

1

In  time,  Treslove  came  to  believe  he  could  very  easily  have  reason  to
suspect  Finkler  of  setting  his  sights  on  Hephzibah.  If  this  was  a  rather
roundabout way of putting it, that was because Treslove's suspicions were
themselves rather roundabout.

In  fact,  he  had  no  reason  to  believe  that  Finkler  had  set  his  sights  on
Hephzibah  but  he  chose  to  suspect  him  anyway.  Nothing  he  had  seen,
nothing  that  either  Finkler  or  Hephzibah  had  said,  just  a  feeling.  And  in
jealousy a feeling is a reason.

He accepted that such a feeling might simply be the child of his devotion.
When you love a woman deeply you are bound to imagine that every other
man must love her deeply too. But it wasn't every other man he had reason
to believe had set his sights on Hephzibah. Just Finkler.

Without doubt, Finkler had changed. He was less cocksure, somehow. He
held his head differently. When he came round to dinner with Libor he was
quiet  and  unwilling 
to  be  drawn  on  Isrrrae.  It  was  Hephzibah's
understanding, and Hephzibah was professionally in the know, that he had
fallen out with his fellow exponents of Jewish ASHamedness in the matter
of the proposed academic boycott. Though how serious was the falling-out
she couldn't say.

'That  would  be  because  he  doesn't  want  to  lose  an  all-expenses-paid

lecture tour of Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and Eilat,' Treslove guessed.

'Julian!' Hephzibah said.
(See!)
'Julian what?'
'Do you know that for a certainty?'
Treslove conceded that he didn't. But he knew his friend.
'Well, I wonder sometimes if you do,' Hephzibah said.
(See!!)
With Treslove, too, Finkler was less combative, as though sensitive to the
changes  wrought  in  him  by  Hephzibah's  influence.  But  did  that  mean  he

saw  Treslove  differently  or  simply  wanted  some  of  what  Treslove  had
found for himself?

Yet  Hephzibah  was  surely  not  Finkler's  type,  particularly  if  Tyler  was
anything to go by. Treslove knew that Finkler had always taken mistresses.
Jewish ones, too, Tyler had told him. But he was unable to picture them.
The  deep  dark  separation  of  Ronit  Kravitz's  breasts,  for  example,  would
have come as a surprise to him had he seen them. When he put his mind to
Finkler's mistresses he imagined them as Jewish versions of Tyler whom he
had  always  taken  for  a  Jewess  anyway.  Razor-blade  women  with  narrow
jaws,  more  likely  to  favour  sharply  tailored  trouser  suits  than  shawls  and
cloaks.  Women  who  hit  the  ground  running,  in  creases  and  stilettos,  not
women who floated slowly down in acres of material. So no one remotely
resembling Hephzibah. Which could mean one of two things: either Finkler
was after Hephzibah only in order to get back at Treslove for something or
other, or he had fallen for her as a woman entirely beyond his experience
and preference, and in that case was likely to be dangerously smitten. Just
as Treslove himself had been. Just as Treslove himself still was. The sixty-
four-thousand-dollar  question  was  what  Hephzibah  felt.  Was  she  smitten
too?

'Libor? Of course he's lonely.'
'No, Sam.'
Hephzibah sipped her tea. 'If you like.'
'Well, only if you like.'
'Yes, I like.'
'Him or the idea of dinner?'
'Explain that.'
'Do you like the idea generally of having somebody round for dinner and
that somebody might as well be Sam, or do you especially like the idea of
its being Sam?'

She put her tea down and rolled over to his side of the bed. He loved the
billowing  undulations  of  the  mattress  when  Hephzibah  moved  in  his
direction. Everything was momentous with her. From the start the earth had

He  brought  the  matter  up  with  her  in  bed  at  the  end  of  a  couple  of
unusually  taciturn  days  between  them.  What  he  didn't  know  was  that  she
was keeping information about the second attack on the museum from him.
'Should  we  have  Sam  over  for  dinner  one  night  soon?'  he  said.  'With

Libor? I think he's lonely.'

moved  for  him  in  her  company,  the  oceans  had  heaved,  the  skies  had
gathered  and  gone  black.  Making  love  to  her  was  like  surviving  an
electrical  storm.  And  some  nights  he  wouldn't  have  minded  had  he  not
survived. But the mornings too were heavy with promise. Something would
be  said.  Something  would  happen.  No  day  went  by  without  her  being  an
event.

So  different  from  the  mothers  of  his  sons,  whose  pregnancies  he  had

failed to notice.

pregnant.

But  then  they  had  left  him  by  the  time  they  discovered  they  were

But then he should have noticed that they'd left him.
'What's this about?' Hephzibah asked, coming at last to rest in the small

corner of the bed that belonged to him.

'This? Nothing. I just wondered if you liked the idea of dinner.'
'With Sam?'
'Ah, so you do like the idea of Sam? That's to say of dinner with Sam?'
'Julian, what's this about?'
'I'm wondering if you're having an affair with him.'
'With Sam?'
'Or at least thinking about having an affair with him.'
'With Sam?'
'There you are, you see, you can't stop saying his name.'
'Julian,  why  would  I  be  having  or  thinking  of  having  an  affair  with

anybody? I'm having an affair with you.'

'That doesn't stop people.'
'Wouldn't it stop you?'
'Me, yes. But I'm not like other people.'
'That's true,' she said, 'but then neither am I. You should believe that.'
'Then I do.'
She made him look at her. 'I have no interest in Sam Finkler,' she said. 'I
don't find him interesting or attractive. He is the kind of Jewish man I have
been avoiding all my life.'

'What kind is that?'
'Arrogant,  heartless,  self-centred,  ambitious,  and  convinced  his

intelligence makes him irresistible.'

'That sounds like a description, from your own account, of the two men

you married.'

'Exactly.  In  between  marrying  them  I  was  avoiding  them.  And  since

marrying them I have avoided them.'

'But you only avoid what you fear, surely. Do you fear Sam?'
She laughed loudly. Too loudly?
'Well, he would no doubt love the idea that I do, but I don't. It's a strange

question, though. Could it be that it's you who fears Sam?'

'Me? Why would I fear Sam?'
'For the same reason that I do.'
'But you said you don't.'
'And  you  aren't  sure  you  believe  me.  Did  you  have  a  thing  together  at

school?'

another out?'

'Me and Sam? Christ, no.'
'Don't be so horrified. Boys do that, don't they?'
'Not any boys I knew.'
'Then maybe you should have. I think it's good to get all that out of the

way early. Both my husbands had things at school.'

'With each other?'
'No, you fool. They didn't know each other. With other boys.'
'Yes and you weren't happy being married to them.'
'But not for that reason. I was waiting all along for you.'
'The goy?'
She wrapped a grand arm around him and gathered him into her bosom.
'As a goy - I have to tell you - you're a bit of a disappointment. Most goys I
know  don't  spend  their  time  reading  Moses  Maimonides  and  memorising
Yiddish endearments.'

He let himself be storm-tossed, riding her billowing sea. When she held
him like this he could see nothing, but the colour of his blindness was the
colour of waves breaking.

'Neshomeleh,' he said, into her flesh.
But he couldn't leave it at that. The next day, over his five-pan omelette,

he said, 'Is there a special bond?'

'Between?'
'Jews.'
'Depends on the Jews.'
'Is  it  like  being  gay?  Is  there  a  Jewdar  that  enables  you  to  pick  one

'Again, depends. I rarely think someone is Jewish when they're not, but I

quite often don't know I'm talking to a Jew when I am.'

'And what is it you look for?'
'I'm not looking for anything.'
'What is that you recognise, then?'
'Can't  explain.  It's  not  one  thing,  it's  a  collection  of  things.  Features,

facial expression, a way of talking, a way of moving.'

'So you're making racial calculations?'
'I wouldn't call them racial, no.'
'Religious?'
'No, definitely not religious.'
'Then what?'
She didn't know what.
'But you make a connection.'
'Again, depends.'
'And with Sam?'
'What about with Sam?'
'Do you make the connection?'
She sighed.
She  sighed  the  next  time  Treslove  brought  it  up  as  well.  And  the  time
after that. She thought she'd put his suspicions to bed. But that wasn't the
only reason she sighed the third time. Strangely enough, Sam had called in
to  see  her  that  afternoon  at  the  museum.  This  was  not  something  he  had
ever  done  before.  Nor  was  it  a  visit  she  could  explain.  It  was  as  though,
when she saw him, he had materialised out of Treslove's conversation, or
even out of Treslove's will.

He  must  have  been  surprised  himself,  so  open-mouthed  was  her

welcome.

'To what do I owe this?' she asked, giving him her hand.
She knew the answer. She owed it to her lover's fears.
'Oh, I was driving past and I just thought I would call in,' he said. 'See

how it's going. Is Julian here?'

still in this state.'

'No. He's stopped coming in. There's not a lot he can do here while we're

He looked about. At the finished cabinets, at the murals, at the banks of
computers and headphones. On a far wall he thought he caught sight of a
photograph of Sir Isaiah Berlin and Frankie Vaughan. Not together.

'It's looking pretty well advanced to me,' he said.
'Yes, but nothing's connected.'
'So I can't trace my genealogy yet?'
'I didn't know you wanted to.'
He shrugged his shoulders. Who could say what he wanted? 'Any chance

of a guided tour,' he asked, 'or are you too busy?'

She looked at her watch. 'I can give you ten minutes,' she said. 'But only
if you promise to be less ironical about us than you were the last time we
talked. This is not, I remind you, a Holocaust memorial museum.'

He smiled at her. He was not, she thought, so unattractive.
'Oh, I wouldn't mind if it were,' he said.

2

When  Treslove  told  Hephzibah  he  thought  Finkler  was  looking  lonely  he
omitted to mention where the thought came from. Other, that is, than from
his own fear of being lonely. It came from a text Alfredo had sent him. saw
your freaky telly friend out looking for tarts surprised you weren't with him
Treslove texted back how do you tell when a man's out looking for tarts?
It took Alfredo a couple of days to work up a reply. his tongues hanging

out

Treslove texted back you are no son of mine, but decided against sending
it.  He  didn't  want  to  give  Alfredo  a  free  shot  at  him  for  his  paternal
negligence.

As  for  Finkler,  leaving  Hephzibah  out  of  it,  he  was  sorry  for  him  if
Alfredo's low supposition happened to be true, and sorrier still if it wasn't
but Finkler just looked like a man with no home to go to and no wife to care
for.

It was a terrible thing to lose the woman you loved.

3

'You're probably imagining it,' Libor said.

Treslove had taken him out for a salt-beef sandwich in the reopened Nosh
Bar  on  Windmill  Street.  Years  before,  Libor  had  brought  Treslove  and
Finkler here. Part of his introducing the young men to the hidden delights of

the city Libor had come to love above all others. Then, a salt-beef sandwich
in Soho was to Treslove as a descent into the underworld of cosmopolitan
debauchery. He felt as though he were living through the last days of the
Roman Empire, no matter that the Romans would not have known of salt-
beef sandwiches. Now Treslove wondered if he was living through the last
days of himself.

Libor,  too,  it  seemed  to  him.  The  old  man  painstakingly  separated  the
beef from the rye bread because the latter did not digest easily, and then he
didn't touch the beef. He had asked for no mustard. He wanted no pickled
cucumber.

He no longer ate his food, he merely pulled it apart.
In  the  past  he  would  have  looked  out  of  the  window  and  enjoyed  the
parade of dissolutes. Today he stared as through shuttered eyes. I have done
him no favours bringing him here, Treslove thought.

But  then  the  outing  hadn't  been  planned  as  a  favour  to  Libor.  It  was  a

necessity to Treslove.

'Why would I imagine it?' he asked. 'I'm happy. I'm in love. I believe I am

loved. Where would I conjure up this dread from?'

'The usual place,' Libor said.
'That's too Czech for me, Libor. Where's the usual place?'
'The place everything we fear comes from. The place where we store our

longing for the end of things.'

'That's more Czech still. I have no longing for the end of things.'
Libor smiled at him and laid an old unsteady hand on his. But for the old
and  the  unsteady  the  gesture  reminded  Treslove  of  Hephzibah.  Why  did
everybody pat him?

'My friend, all the years I've known you you've been longing for the end
of  things.  You've  lived  in  preparation,  on  the  edge  of  tears,  all  your  life.
Malkie  noticed  that  about  you.  She  wasn't  sure  she  should  even  play
Schubert when you were listening. He doesn't need any encouragement, that
one, she said.'

'Encouragement to do what?'
'To throw yourself into the flames. Isn't that what being with my niece

and reading Moses Maimonides is about?'

'I don't think of Hephzibah as fire.'
'Don't you? Then what are you so anxious about? I think you're getting
what you went in there to get. The whole Jewish gesheft. You think it's a

short cut to catastrophe. And I'm not going to say you're wrong.'

He wanted to say that's crap, Libor. But you don't ask an elderly man out
for salt-beef sandwiches he is unable to digest and tell him that what he's
saying is crap. 'I don't recognise what you're describing,' he said instead.

Libor  shrugged.  If  you  don't  you  don't.  He  didn't  have  the  strength  to
argue. But he could see Treslove needed more. 'The fall, the flood, Sodom
and Gomorrah, the Last Judgement, Masada, Auschwitz - see a Jew and you
think  of  Armageddon,'  he  said.  'We  tell  good  creation  stories  but  we  do
destruction even better. We're at the beginning and the end of everything.
And everyone's after a piece of the action. Those who can't wait to pitchfork
us into the flames, want to go down screaming by our side. It's one or the
other. Temperamentally, you were always going to choose the other.'

'You sound like your great-great-niece.'
'Not surprising. We're family, you know.'
'But  isn't  all  this  a  bit  solipsistic,  Libor,  as  Sam  would  say?  By  your

account there's no escaping the Jews for anyone.'

Libor pushed his plate aside. 'There's no escaping the Jews for anyone,'

Treslove  stared  out  of  the  window.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  narrow
street, an ill-favoured, fat girl in a short skirt was trying to persuade men to
come into a club only a desperate or a deranged person would enter. She
saw  him  looking  at  her  and  beckoned  him  over.  Bring  your  friend,  her
gesture implied. Bring your salt-beef sandwich. He lowered his eyes.

'And you think,' he said, picking up Libor's thread, 'that I am imagining

he said.

Hephzibah and Sam in order to hasten my end?'

Libor waved his hands in front of his face. 'I didn't quite say that. But

people who expect the worst will always see the worst.'

'I haven't seen anything.'
'Exactly.'
Treslove put his elbows on the table. 'Libor, since you tell me Hephzibah

is your family, what's your view? Do you think she would do this?'

'With Sam?'
'With anybody?'
'Well,  her  being  my  family  doesn't  make  her  different  from  any  other
woman. Though I have never gone along with the view that women are by
nature inconstant. My own experience has been very different. Malkie never
played me false.'

'Can you be sure?'
'Of course I can't be sure. But if she allowed me to believe she had never
played me false, then she never played me false. You don't judge fidelity by
every act; it's the desire to say you're faithful and the desire to be believed.'

'That can't be true, Libor. Outside Prague.'
'We didn't live in Prague. What I'm saying is that an indiscretion needn't

matter. It's the overall intention of fidelity that counts.'

'So  Hephzibah  might  mean  to  be  faithful  to  me  but  still  happen  to  be

fucking Sam.'

'I hope she isn't.'
'I hope she isn't.'
'And I doubt she is. The question is, why don't you doubt she is, if you

have seen nothing to make you suppose otherwise.'

Treslove thought about it.
'I need to order another sandwich,' he said, as though truthful reflection

were dependent on it.

'Have mine,' Libor said.
Treslove shook his head and thought of Tyler. 'Have mine,' Finkler had

said, if not in so many words. 'Have mine, I am otherwise engaged.'

He had never told Libor of his evenings with Tyler, watching Finkler's
documentaries. He had never told anybody. They were not his alone to tell.
They were poor Tyler's too. And in a sense they were Finkler's also. But he
wished he could mention the affair, if it ever really was an affair, to Libor
now. It would help to explain something, though he wasn't sure what. But
how  would  he  know  what  if  he  didn't  hear  himself  put  the  question  into
words. Libor was old. Who would he tell? The secret that would otherwise
go to the grave with Treslove, would surely go to the grave much sooner
with Libor.

So on an impulse, he told.
Libor listened quietly. When it was over, to Treslove's astonishment, he
cried.  Not  copious  tears,  just  a  tear  or  two  in  the  corner  of  an  old  man's
rheumy eye.

'I'm sorry,' Treslove said.
'You should be.'
Treslove didn't know what to say. He hadn't expected a response of this
sort. Libor was a man of the world. Just squeeze me in a little fuck when
you  come  to  make  a  report  of  my  life,  he  had  told  Treslove.  Men  and

women  did  these  things.  An  indiscretion  needn't  matter  -  Libor's  own
words.

'I shouldn't have told you,' Treslove said. 'It was wrong of me.'
Libor looked into his hands. 'Yes, it was wrong of you to tell me,' he said,
as though not talking to Treslove at all. 'Probably more wrong of you to tell
me than to do it. I don't want the burden of the knowledge. I would prefer to
remember Tyler differently. And you. Sam it doesn't really matter about. He
can  look  after  himself.  Though  I  would  rather  have  not  known  about  the
falsity of your friendship. You make the world a sadder place, Julian, and it
is already sad enough, believe me. Why did you tell me? It was unkind of
you.'

'I don't know. And I say again I'm truly sorry. I don't know what made me

do this.'

'You  do.  One  always  does  know  why  one  tells.  Is  it  because  you  are

proud of it as an escapade?'
'An escapade? God, no.'
'A conquest, then?'
'A conquest? God, no.'
'So you are proud of it as something. Are you proud of it because you got

one over on Sam?'

all the time would not suffice.

Treslove knew he had a duty to think about his answer. Saying God, no

'Not got one over, Libor. I hope not that. More having got into his world.

Their world.'

'From which you'd felt excluded?'
He had a duty to think about that, too. 'Yes.'
'Because they were a glamorously successful pair?'
'I suppose so, yes.'
'But Sam was your friend. You'd grown up with him. You continued to

see him. He didn't inhabit a universe that was beyond yours.'

'I'd grown up with him but he'd always been different to me. A mystery

in some way.'

Jew?'

'Because  he  was  clever?  Because  he  was  famous?  Because  he  was  a

Treslove's salt-beef sandwich arrived, dripping in mustard the way he'd
learned  to  like  it.  Accompanied  by  not  one  but  two  pickled  cucumbers
chopped into fine slices.

'That's a tough one to answer,' he said. 'But yes, all right, all of those.'
'So  when  you  lay  in  the  arms  of  his  wife  you  were,  for  a  moment,  as

clever as he was, as famous as he was, as Jewish as he was.'

Treslove didn't say that he had never lain in Tyler's arms, and that she had
never lain in his. He didn't want Libor to know that she had turned her back
to him.

'I guess.'
'Any one more than the others?'
Treslove sighed. A sigh from deep in the bowels of his guilt and of his

fears. 'I can't say,' he said.

'Then let me say for you. It was the Jew part that mattered to you most.'
Treslove leaned across the table to halt him. 'Before you go on,' he said,
'you do know that Tyler wasn't Jewish. I'd thought she was, but it turned out
that she wasn't.'

'You sound disappointed.'
'I was, a little.'
'All the more, then, I say it was the Jew. And I know that it was the Jew

because of what you are afraid of in Sam and Hephzibah now.'

Treslove looked at him, an old man with no digestion system left, telling

riddles. 'Don't follow,' he said.

'You suspect Sam and Hephzibah of what? Having sex together. And on
what  evidence?  None,  except  that  you  suppose  that  is  what  they  will  do
because  they  share  something  that  excludes  you.  They  are  Jews,  you  are
not, therefore they are fucking.'

'Oh, come on, Libor.'
'Please yourself. But you have no better explanation for your suspicions.
You  won't  be  the  first  Gentile  to  ascribe  lasciviousness  to  Jews.  We  had
horns once, and a tail, like goats or like the devil. We bred like vermin. We
polluted Christian women. The Nazis -'

'Libor, stop - this is foolish and insulting.'
The old man sat back in his chair and rubbed his head. Once upon a time
he  had  a  wife  who  rubbed  it  for  him,  laughing  as  she  polished,  like  a
housewife delighting in her chores. But that was long ago.

Insulting? He shrugged.
'I am deeply ashamed,' Treslove said. 'For telling you what I told you.'
'You are deeply ashamed? Then that's something else you two share.'
'Show me mercy,' Treslove begged.

'Julian, you started this,' Libor said. 'You invited me out to discuss your
fear that Sam and Hephzibah are fucking. I ask you what your suspicions
are built on. You tell me an indefinable dread. I'm your friend - so I'm doing
my best to define it for you. You attribute strange and secret sexual powers
to  them,  that's  why  you  are  afraid.  You  think  they  can't  stop  themselves
because they are driven by an ungovernable sexual urge, Jew to Jew, and
you think they won't stop themselves because they are unscrupulous, Jew to
Gentile. Julian, you're an anti-Semite.'

'Me?'
'Don't sound so astonished. You're not alone. We're all anti-Semites. We

have no choice. You. Me. Everyone.'

He had not eaten a bite of food.

4

They went to the theatre together - Hephzibah, Treslove and Finkler. It was
Treslove's  birthday  and  Hephzibah  had  suggested  an  outing  instead  of  a
party, since every day was a party for them. They had asked Libor along but
he didn't fancy the sound of the play.

None of them fancied the sound of the play. But as Finkler said, if you
don't go to the theatre whenever you don't like the sound of a play, when do
you ever go to the theatre? Besides, it was only on for a week, a piece of
agitprop that people were writing angry or enthusiastic letters to the papers
about. London was buzzing with it.

'Are  you  sure  it  won't  spoil  your  birthday?'  Hephzibah  asked,  having

second thoughts.

'I'm  not  a  child,'  Treslove  told  her.  He  didn't  add  that  everything  was

spoiling his birthday so why pick on this.

It  was  called  Sons  of  Abraham  and  charted  the  agonies  of  the  Chosen
People from ancient times up until the present when they decided to visit
their agonies on someone else. The final scene was a well-staged tableau of
destruction,  all  smoke  and  rattling  metal  sheets  and  Wagnerian  music,  to
which  the  Chosen  People  danced  like  slow-motion  devils,  baying  and
hallooing, bathing their hands and feet in the blood that oozed like ketchup
from the corpses of their victims, a fair number of whom were children.

Finkler, sitting on the other side of Hephzibah to Treslove, was surprised
to  discover  from  the  programme  notes  that  Tamara  Krausz  had  neither

written it nor assisted in its production. Watching it made him feel she was
in  the  theatre  somewhere.  Not  quite  next  to  him.  Hephzibah  was  next  to
him.  But  nearby.  He  could  smell  the  harlot  allure  of  her  vindictive
intelligence,  laying  out  her  daughters  of  Hebron  beauty  for  her  father's
enemies to feast and avenge themselves upon.

In  the  final  seconds  of  the  drama  an  aerial  shot  of  a  mass  grave  at
Auschwitz  was  projected  on  to  a  gauze  curtain,  before  dissolving  into  a
photograph of the rubble of Gaza.

Pure Tamara.
It received a standing ovation. Neither Hephzibah nor Treslove rose from
their  seats.  Finkler  laughed  loudly,  turning  round  so  that  people  could
observe  him.  Treslove  was  surprised  by  this  reaction.  Not  just  by  the
judgement it implied but by the antic nature of it. Had Finkler flipped his
lid?

A number of ASHamed Jews were in the audience but Finkler thought
their response to seeing him there was decidedly cold. Only Merton Kugle
made an approach.
'Well?' he asked.
'Superb,' Finkler said. 'Simply superb.'
'So why were you laughing?'
'Wasn't laughter, Merton. Those were the contortions of grief.'
Kugle nodded and went out into the street.
Finkler  wondered  if  he'd  popped  into  a  supermarket  on  his  way  to  the

theatre and had tins of proscribed Israeli sturgeon in his pockets.

People left the theatre quietly, deep in thought. That deep in thought that
is  available  only  to  those  who  already  know  what  they  think.  They  were
mainly from the caring and the performing professions, Finkler reckoned.
He  believed  he  recognised  a  number  of  them  from  demos  in  Trafalgar
Square.  They  had  the  air  of  seasoned  marchers.  End  the  massacre!  Stop
Israeli  genocide!  At  another  time  he'd  have  shaken  hands  with  them,  in
sombre festivity, like survivors of an air raid.

He suggested a birthday drink for Treslove at the bar in the crypt of the
theatre.  It  reminded  them  all  of  their  student  days.  Rare  ales  on  tap.
Houmous and tabbouleh with pitta bread to eat. Old couches draped with
black curtains to talk things over on. Finkler bought the drinks, clinked his
glass with Treslove and Hephzibah and then fell quiet. For ten minutes they
didn't  speak.  Treslove  wondered  whether  the  silence  denoted  suppressed

eroticism on the part of the other two. It surprised him greatly that Finkler
had  accepted  their  invitation  -  that's  to  say  Hephzibah's  invitation  -  to
accompany  them  to  the  play.  He  must  have  known  they  would  react
differently to it from him and perhaps even end up having a row. So there
was  an  underlying  motive  to  his  aceptance.  Out  of  the  side  of  his  head,
Treslove kept an eye on their mutual glances and hand movements. He saw
nothing.

In the end it was another person who broke what Treslove took to be their

ideological deadlock.

'Hey! Surprised to see you here.'
Treslove heard the voice before he saw the person.
'Abe!'
Hephzibah,  getting  caught  up  in  the  couch  drapes,  rose  in  a  tangle  of

shawls. 'Julian, Sam, this is Abe - my ex.'

Which one of us, Treslove speculated, does Abe think she's with now -

Julian or Sam?

Abe  shook  hands  and  joined  them.  A  roguish  and  yet  somehow
angelically  handsome  man  with  a  crinkled  halo  of  black  hair  shot  with
white, like gleams of light, a hawkish nose and eyes close together. He has a
face that bores, Treslove thought, meaning a face that stabs and pierces not
a  face  that  wearies.  A  prophet's  or  philosopher's  face  -  which  thought
pleased him in that it would be Finkler who should be jealous, therefore, not
him.

Hephzibah had of course told him about her two husbands, Abe and Ben,
but he had to rack his brains to remember which was the lawyer and which
the actor. Given where they were, how he looked and the black T-shirt he
was wearing, he calculated that Abe must be the actor.

'Abe's  a  lawyer,'  Hephzibah  said.  She  was  flushed,  even  flustered,
Treslove thought, with the attentions of so many men. Her past, her present,
her future . . .

'So why did you say you were surprised to see Hep here?' Treslove asked,
staking a claim which a more confident man would have considered already
staked.

Abe glowed like the embers of a fire that had only just gone out. 'Not her

kind of play,' he said.

reckoned, noticing everything.

'Do  I  have  a  kind  of  play?'  Hephzibah  enquired.  Skittish,  Treslove

'Well, not this kind.'
'You've heard about my museum?'
'I have.'
'Then it shouldn't surprise you that I have to keep my ear to the ground.'
'Though not necessarily that low to it,' Finkler said.
Treslove was astonished. 'You're telling me you didn't like it?'
Hephzibah too. 'That's interesting,' she said.
So  was  that  what  he  was  doing,  Treslove  wondered,  interesting

Finkler turned to Abe. 'Julian and I went to school together,' he said. 'He

Hephzibah?

thinks he knows what I like.'

it?'

Treslove stood up for himself. 'You're an ASHamed Jew. You're the Sam
the Man of ASHamed Jews. You had to like it. It was written for you. Could
have been written by you. I've heard you speak it.'

'Not  those  words  have  you  ever  heard  me  speak.  I  don't  do  Nazi
analogies. The Nazis were the Nazis. Anyway, did you hear me say I didn't
like it? I loved it. I only wished there'd been more singing and dancing. It
lacked  a  show-stopper  like  "Springtime  for  Hitler",  that's  my  only
complaint. I couldn't tap my feet. Put it this way, did you see anyone going
out humming the Wagner?'

'So let me get this straight,' Treslove said. 'This is a taste issue for you, is

'Isn't it for you?'
'Not in the musical sense, no.'
Finkler put an arm around his shoulder. 'Do you know,' he said, 'I think
I'd like to leave this conversation to the rest of you. I'll get more birthday
drinks. Abe?'

Abe  didn't  drink.  Ot  at  least  he  didn't  drink  tonight.  In  a  manner  of

speaking, he told them, he was working.

'Aren't you always,' Hephzibah said, exercising the privilege of an ex.
'Doing what?' Treslove asked.
'Well, essentially just watching the play and gauging responses to it. One

of the co-writers is a client.'

'And you're here to see if he has a case for claiming damages from the
Jewish people?' Hephzibah continued, squeezing his arm. Treslove felt that
he had seen into their marriage and wished he hadn't.

On two glasses of wine, more than her year's allowance, Hephzibah had,

in his view, exceeded her yearly allowance of skittishness also.

'Well, if you're here to gauge responses I'm happy to give you mine,' he

said, but he was out of time with the conversation and wasn't heard.

'Abe always did know how to screw the last penny out of a defendant,'

Hephzibah told him.

'That's not quite the way of it,' Abe said.
'What, the Jewish people are suing him?'
'No, not the Jews. And it's not about money either. He's just been sacked
by his university department. He's a marine biologist when he's not writing
plays. He was sacked when he was underwater. I'm trying to get him his job
back.'

'Sacked for writing this play?'
'Not exactly. For saying that Auschwitz was more a holiday camp than a

hell for most of the Jews in there.'

'And where there's no hell, there's no devil - is that the idea?'
'Well I can't speak for his theology. What he argues, and claims he can
prove beyond doubt, is that there were casinos and spas and prostitutes laid
on.  He  has  photographs  of  Jews  lying  on  their  backs  in  swimming  pools
being fed iced strawberries by camp hostesses.'

Hephzibah guffawed. 'Then by the terms of his own play,' she said, 'Gaza
must be a holiday camp too. He can't have it both ways. No point calling
out  the  Jews  as  Nazis  if  the  Nazis  turn  out  to  have  been  fun-loving
philanthropists.'

'Maybe Sam was right in that case and what we've just watched was a

light romantic comedy,' Treslove said, but he was out of time again.

'I  think  that's  being  a  bit  literalist  about  the  way  analogy  is  meant  to
work,'  Abe  said,  replying  to  Hephzibah  not  Treslove.  But  he  looked  at
Treslove, man to man, husband to husband. Such literalists, wives!

'So as a Jew, what do you think?' Treslove asked, raising his tempo.
'Well as a lawyer -'
'No, as a Jew what do you think?'
'About the play? Or about my client?'
'About the lot. The play, your client, the Auschwitz lido.'
Abe showed him the palms of his hands. 'As a Jew I believe that every

argument has a counter-argument,' he said.

'That's why we make such good lawyers,' Hephzibah laughed, squeezing

both men's arms.

These  people  don't  know  how  to  stand  up  for  themselves,  Treslove

thought. These people have had their chips.

He went to the bathroom. Bathrooms always made him angry. They were
places  that  returned  him  to  himself.  Illusionless,  he  looked  in  the  mirror.
They've ceded their sense of outrage, he said to his reflection, washing his
hands.

When  he  returned  he  saw  that  Sam  had  joined  the  party  again.  Sam,
Hephzibah,  Abe.  A  cosy  coterie  of  Finklers.  Or  maybe  it's  just  me  who's
had his chips, Treslove thought.

ELEVEN

1

Walking to the museum a week later, Hephzibah thought I am at the end of
my tether with the lot of them.

She didn't know if Finkler was chasing her. But Abe, her ex, definitely
was. He rang her two or three times after their chance meeting at Sons of
Abraham. No dice, she told him, I'm happy.

He replied that he could see she was happy, which was no more than she
deserved, but wanted to know what her being happy had to do with meeting
him for a drink.
'I don't drink.'
'You were drinking the other night.'
'That was a special occasion. I'd just been accused of infanticide. When

you're accused of infanticide you drink.'

'I'll accuse you of infanticide.'
'Don't joke about it.'
'All right, you don't drink. But you do talk.'
'We're talking.'
'I'd like to hear about the museum.'
'It's a museum. I'll send you a prospectus.'
'Is it a Holocaust museum?'
Christ, another one, she thought.
One in, one out. Finkler had stopped being ironical about the museum.
He hadn't paid another surprise visit to her there but he somehow or other
contrived  to  be  around  her  more,  showed  up  where  he  was  not  expected,
and  even  when  he  wasn't  in  evidence  in  person  somehow  succeeded  in
making his presence felt, popping up on television or in some third party's
conversation, as when Abe, trying to prise her out, said how pleased he was
to meet Sam Finkler at the theatre as he had always admired him. Though
she was by no means a sexually vain woman - she was too reliant on shawls
for sexual vanity - she didn't quite believe in Finkler's latest expressions of
curiosity about her work. Curiosity did not come naturally to him. But at
least  the  jeering  had  been  replaced  by  civility.  As  for  what  that  civility

denoted  she  couldn't  judge  it  clearly  because  Treslove's  apprehensions
clouded her view.

So she was at the end of her tether with herself as well. Yet again seeing

the world as the man she loved saw it.

But perhaps all these irritations were a smokescreen for some other anger
or sadness altogether. Julian worried her. He was beginning to look like a
man  who  didn't  know  what  to  do  with  himself  next.  Libor  too.  She  had
barely seen him in weeks and when she did he didn't make her laugh. Libor
without jokes was not Libor.

And the information that poured into her office - continuing accusations
of apartheid and ethnic cleansing, news of world charities and human rights
organisations  citing  war  crimes  and  advocating  boycotts,  an  incessant
buzzing of rumour and reproach in the ears of Jews, a demoralisation that
was  no  less  effective  for  being  random  (she  hoped  to  God  that  it  was
random)  -  only  added  fuel  to  her  disquiet.  Hephzibah  was  not  a  fervent
Zionist. She had never been a land-centred Jew. St John's Wood was fine for
her as a place to be Jewish in. She only wished she could find a reference in
the Bible to God's covenant with English Jews, promising them St John's
Wood High Street. But Zionism's achievements could not go unnoticed in a
museum  of  Anglo-Jewish  culture,  given  the  contribution  to  Zionism
English  Jews  had  made,  even  a  museum  situated  a  step  from  the  zebra
crossing made famous by the Beatles. The question she had to wrestle with
was how far Zionism's failures had to be noticed as well.

There had been a lull in odious incident. No bacon had been smeared on
the  door  handles  for  weeks,  no  defacements  vowing  revenge  and  death.
(Revenge, in St John's Wood!) Things had fallen quiet in the Middle East, at
least as far as the British media was concerned, so the rage that clung on to
the coat-tails of news report had temporarily abated. Yes, Sons of Abraham
had reinvigorated some of it among the broadsheeet-reading, theatregoing
classes where, it seemed to her, it lay smouldering all the time now, like a
fire that wouldn't go out, but at least Jews weren't for the moment the only
topic  of  educated  conversation.  The  trouble  was  that  the  calm  felt  more
sinister  than  the  storm.  What  would  it  take,  what  action  against  Gaza  or
Lebanon or even Iran, what act of belligerence or retaliation, what event in
Wall Street, what incidence of Jewish influence of the wrong sort round the
corner in Downing Street, for it all to start up again, next time with more
violence than the last, the more virulent for its slumbers?

She herself hadn't slept easily in an age, and that wasn't simply down to
having  Treslove  in  her  bed.  She  didn't  walk  to  work  in  easy  spirits.  She
didn't meet her friends in easy spirits. An anxiety had settled like a fine dust
on everything she did, and on everyone she knew - on all the Jews at least.
They too were looking askance - not over their shoulders exactly, but into a
brittly  uncertain  future  which  bore  fearful  resemblances  to  an  only  too
certain past.

Paranoia,  was  it?  she  asked  herself.  The  question  itself  had  become
monotonous to her. It was the natural one to ask as she walked to work in
the wintry sunshine, skirting an empty Lord's, wishing she could be a man
who forgot himself in sport, full of dread as to what she would find when
she  arrived  at  the  museum.  Am I becoming paranoid? The  rhythm  of  the
wondering affected her pace. She had begun to walk in time to it.

The  thought  that  the  museum  was  a  target  frightened  her.  But  she  was
frightened  of  her  fear  no  less.  Jews  were  supposed  to  have  put  all  this
behind them. 'Never again' and all that. Well, it was hard to picture herself
as a deportee in a thin floral dress, carrying a little suitcase, her eyes hollow
with terror, as she strolled through leafy St John's Wood with her jewellery
clinking and a bag costing fifteen hundred pounds under her arm. But the
hollow-eyed woman in the floral dress - wouldn't she have once found her
fate hard to picture too?

So was it paranoia? She didn't know. No one knew. There were people
who claimed that the paranoid create the thing they fear. But how could that
be?  How  does  being  afraid  of  hate  manufacture  it?  Were  there  Nazis  out
there who didn't know they were Nazis until a Jew showed his alarm? Did
the smell of Jewish apprehension send them out to the costumiers in search
of a brown shirt and jackboots?

The old foetor Judaicus. She had always taken the imagined smell to be
sulphurous, an accompaniment to the tail and horns, conclusive proof that
the Jew was friendly with the devil and that his natural habitat was hell. A
cabinet in her museum would mention the foetor Judaicus along with other
Christian  superstitions  about  Jews,  now  long  consigned  to  the  dustbin  of
medieval hatred, a reminder of how far Jews in this country had travelled.

Or had they?
But what if the foetor Judaicus was not hellish in origin at all? What if
the smell that medieval Christians sniffed on the horned and hairy bodies of
Jews was simply the smell of fear?

If so - if there are people who will murder you because they are aroused
by  the  odour  of  your  fear  -  is  the  concept  of  anti-Semitism  itself  an
aphrodisiac, an erotic spur to loathing?

Could  be.  She  loathed  the  word  herself.  Anti-Semitism.  It  had  a
medicinal, antiseptic ring to it. It was something you kept locked away in
your  bathroom  cabinet.  She  had  long  ago  made  a  vow  never  to  open  the
cupboard. If you can help it, don't see the thing; if you can avoid it, don't
use  the  word.  Anti-Semite,  anti-Semite,  anti-Semite  -  its  unmusicality
pained her ear, its triteness degraded her.

If  there  was  one  thing  she  couldn't  forgive  the  anti-Semites  for,  it  was

making her call them anti-Semites.

A couple of Muslim men, perhaps stopping for a talk on their way to the
Regent's Park Mosque, looked at her in a way she found uncomfortable. Or
was she looking at them in a way they found uncomfortable? She paused to
root through her handbag for her keys. The men moved on. Across the road
a  boy  of  about  nineteen  was  talking  into  his  mobile  phone.  He  held  it
suspiciously she thought, cradling it, as though only pretending to talk. Had
he been using it as a camera?

Or a detonator?

2

Treslove tried to fix a time to see Finkler. There were things to talk about.
Libor for one. Where was he? How was he?

And the play. All very well for Finkler to clown about it, but something
needed to be said. Perhaps an answering play to be written. Sons of Ishmael,
or  Jesus's  Children.  Treslove  would  have  been  prepared  to  have  a  go
himself, but he wasn't a writer. Nor do I know much about the subject, he
told Hephzibah, though that, as they agreed, hadn't stopped the authors of
Sons of Abraham. Finkler, on the other hand, was a one man word factory.
And  appeared  to  have  become  more  fluid  in  his  politics.  More  fluid  in
something, anyway.

'Don't count on it,' Hephzibah said, which Treslove interpreted in a dozen

ways, all of them upsetting to his peace of mind.

Hephzibah was, of course, another reason to see Finkler, face to face.
It wasn't his intention to bring the subject of her up. But Finkler might.
And whether he did or he didn't, the odd phrase or look would surely betray

something.

And then there was the matter of the prostitutes. He had no intention of
prying or giving advice. He had no advice to give. But he was supposed to
be Finkler's friend. And if Finkler was in distress, well . . .
He got him on the phone. 'Come out and play,' he said.
But Finkler wasn't in the mood. 'I have of late,' he said, 'lost all my mirth.'
They had worked out a standard answer to that in school.
'I'll find it for you.'
'Nice of you, but I doubt you'll know where to look. I'll take a raincheck

if that's all right.'

He didn't say he had prostitutes to visit. Or online poker to play. Or that
what he had in fact lost of late was his money. Nor did he say, And give my
love to Hep. Was that significant?

Alfredo's  prostitute  text  continued  to  cause  Treslove  unease.  About
Alfredo not least. Why the malice? Why the mischief? Or was he trying to
tell  his  father  that  he  was  reduced  to  going  out  looking  for  prostitutes
himself thanks to his deprived upbringing? You were such a shit dad that I
must seek the consolation of whores.

Treslove wished the pox on him. Then immediately unwished it. All this

being a Jew when he might have done better being a father.

He  did  not  understand  why  anyone  would  seek  the  consolation  of
whores. He did not, himself, do unassociated desire. And he had no reason
to think Finkler did. So either he was so far from himself that there was no
knowing what he would do, including make a move on Hephzibah, or he
had  already  made  a  move  on  Hephzibah,  been  rejected  and  turned  to
prostitutes as Treslove turned to opera.

Unless he had made a move on Hephzibah, been accepted and turned to
prostitutes either a) to assuage his guilt, or b) to express the superabundance
of  his  satisfaction.  That  one  Treslove  did  understand:  that  you  might  go
with a second woman as a delirious after-effect of having just been with the
first.

But not a prostitute. Not after Hephzibah!
Treslove didn't want to be feeling any of this. Either about his friend who
in all likelihood was simply in the deep dejection of widowerhood still. Or
about Hephzibah who was worried sick about the imminent opening of the
museum,  and  wouldn't  have  thanked  Treslove  for  saddling  her  with  the
extraneous  perturbations  of  adultery.  Or  about  himself.  He  wanted  to  be

happy. Or, if he was happy, he wanted to be happier. Sane. Or, if he was
sane, saner.

He didn't quite believe his own suspicions. Jealousy wasn't in his nature.
That wasn't self-flattery. He tried to work up a passion over Finkler and Abe
and anyone else Hephzibah might be seeing at the museum, the architect,
the works foreman, the electrician, the person employed to wipe the bacon
fat  off  door  handles,  the  person  doing  the  smearing  even,  but  he  couldn't
find  any  lasting  rage  or  sorrow.  What  Treslove  did  was  exclusion,  not
jealousy. And though they were related, they were not the same. Jealousy
would have made him angry with Hephzibah, it might even have aroused
him; but all he felt was lonely and rejected.

It was like being a child among adults; not unloved but unlistened to. At
best humoured. He wasn't the real McCoy, that was what it came to. Not
only wasn't he a Jew, he was a jest to Jews.

The real McGoy.
Hephzibah's  mysteriously  extended  family  was  a  case  in  point.  Every
time she took him round to meet the second half-cousin of an aunt-in-law
three  times  removed,  always  surrounded  by  nephews  and  nieces  and  the
children of nephews and nieces who looked just like the last lot but weren't,
they  pounced  on  Treslove,  as  though  he  had  just  been  found  wandering
naked and without language in the Mata Atlantica, in order to be the first to
explain to him the complexities of family relations in the civilised world,
information for which he would certainly have been grateful had it not been
delivered to him as though any kinship system beyond being the only child
of divorced drug-taking parents was bound to be outside the comprehension
of a Gentile.

It was in the same spirit, too, that they fed him, pushing food on him as
though  he  hadn't  had  a  square  meal  since  being  abandoned  to  savages
twenty years before and neither knew the names of any foodstuff that wasn't
grass nor was prepared for any taste that wasn't coconut. 'Be careful, that's
hot!' they would shout when he spooned horseradish on to a slice of tongue,
though he reckoned the mashed banana and strained peach with which one
of the babies was covering his face would have been far hotter. Followed
by,  'You  might  not  like  that,  it's  tongue,  not  everybody  can  cope  with
tongue.'

Not everybody? Did they become everybody the minute they clapped eyes

on him?

No harm was meant, he knew. Quite the opposite. And Hephzibah found
it all very funny, going over to him while it was happening and running her
hands through his hair. But it wore him down. It wouldn't stop. There was
never a time when they opened the door to him and said Julian, how nice to
see you, come in, we have nothing in the way of food or other secrets of our
culture to test you with today and are no more conscious of your being a
Gentile than you are of our being Jews.

He was always a curiosity to them. Always a bit of a barbarian who had
to be placated with beads and mirrors. He charged himself with ingratitude
and  humourlessness.  Each  time  he  fell  into  a  pet  he  promised  he  would
learn to do better. But he never did. They wouldn't let him. Wouldn't let him
in.

And then when they did . . .

3

The face-painting incident.

Once, in his student days, Treslove met a very beautiful hippy girl, a true
wispy child of nature and marijuana, dressed in a big girl's version of a little
girl's nightgown. The occasion was a gestalt nostalgia party in East Sussex.
They were being their parents as they imagined their parents had been. But
they were doing it for real as well, in the sense that they had an ecological
agenda.

Though Treslove was doing a module in Pollution and Conservation he
didn't  exactly  have  an  ecological  agenda  himself.  But  he  was  happy  that
other people did. It made for a good party.

It  was  an  early  summer's  evening,  and  gentleness  was  in  the  air.
Everyone  sat  on  cushions  on  the  floor  and  told  everyone  else  what  they
thought of them. Only rarely did anyone express anything other than deep
affection. There were candles in the garden, music played, people kissed,
cut out shapes from coloured paper which they hung from trees, and painted
one another's faces.

Treslove  had  little  aptitude  for  art  of  any  sort,  but  for  face-painting  he
had no aptitude whatsoever. The beautiful hippy girl floated across to where
he  was  sitting  on  a  garden  bench,  smoking  dope.  Through  her  little  girl's
dress  he  could  see  her  big  girl's  breasts.  'Peace,'  he  said,  offering  her  the
spliff.

She was carrying paints. 'Paint me,' she said.
'I can't,' he told her. 'I have no aptitude.'
'We can all paint,' she said, kneeling in front of him, offering her face.

'Just let the colours flow.'

'Colours don't flow with me,' he explained. 'And I can never think of a

subject.'

hair.

'Paint the me you see,' she told him, closing her eyes and pulling back her

So  Treslove  painted  a  clown.  Not  an  elegant  or  tragic  clown.  Not  a
Pierrot  or  Pirouette,  but  an  Auguste  with  an  absurd  red  nose,  and  big
splotches  of  white  outlined  with  black  around  the  mouth  and  above  the
eyes, and crimson patches on the cheeks. A drooling, dribbling splosher of a
clown.

She cried when she saw what he had done to her. The host of the party
asked  him  to  leave.  Everyone  was  looking.  Including  Finkler  who  was
down from Oxford for the weekend and whom Treslove had taken to the
party.  Finkler  had  his  arms  around  a  girl  whose  face  he  had  exquisitely
painted with floating shapes, in the manner of Chagall.

'What have I done?' Treslove wanted to know.
'You've made a fool of me,' the girl said.
Treslove would not have made a fool of her for the world. In point of fact
he had fallen in love with her while he painted her. It was just that a red
nose and big white mouth and crimson patches on the cheeks were all that
he could think of painting.

'You have humiliated me,' the girl cried, sobbing into a tissue. The tears
mingling  with  the  face  paint  made  her  look  even  more  ridiculous  than
Treslove had made her look. She was beside herself with distress.

Treslove  looked  over  to  Finkler  for  support.  Finkler  shook  his  head  as
over someone to whom he had shown infinite patience in the past but could
forgive  no  more.  He  enfolded  his  girl  in  his  arms  so  that  she  should  not
have to see what his friend had done.

'Leave,' the host said.
 

Treslove was a long time recovering from this incident. It marked him, in
his own eyes, as a man who didn't know how to relate to people, especially
women.  Thereafter,  he  hesitated  when  he  was  invited  to  a  party.  And

started, in the way that some people start from spiders, whenever he saw a
box of children's paints or people painting one another's faces at a fete.

That the girl he had painted as a clown might have been the Judith who
avenged herself on him outside the window of J. P. Guivier had of course
crossed  his  mind.  Everything  crossed  Treslove's  mind.  But  for  it  to  have
been  her,  she  must  have  changed  considerably  over  the  years  both  in
physique and in temper.

Was  it  likely,  either,  that  she  would  nurse  her  grievance,  not  only  for
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  but  to  the  extent  of  deliberately  tracing
Treslove's  whereabouts  and  tracking  him  through  the  streets  of  London?
No.  But  then  again  trauma  is  incalculable  in  its  effects.  Could  he,  with  a
box of paints, have made an insanely unforgiving brute out of that sweet-
natured girl?

Such questions were purely academic now that he had become a Finkler.
What had been, had been. Indeed, he remembered the face-painting incident
only  when  Hephzibah  took  him  to  a  family  birthday  party  at  which  the
paints came out. Though children did not normally take much account of
Treslove whom they managed not to see, this little girl - he was not sure of
her relation to Hephzibah, so assumed a great-great-niece: it was either that
or great-great-aunt - this little girl for some unaccountable reason did.

'Are you Hephzibah's husband?' she asked him.
'In a manner of speaking,' he replied.
'In a manner of speaking yes or no?'
Treslove was uncomfortable talking to children, not knowing whether he
should address them as very young versions of himself, or very old versions
of  himself.  Since  she  was  a  Finkler  and  therefore,  he  assumed,
preternaturally  smart,  he  opted  for  the  very  old  version  of  himself.  'In  a
manner of speaking both,' he said. 'In the eyes of God, if not in the eyes of
society, I am her husband.'

'My daddy says there is no God,' the little girl said.
This  took  Treslove  to  the  limits  of  what  he  knew  about  speaking  to

children. 'Well,' he said, 'there you are then.'

'You're funny,' the little girl told him. There was a precocity about her he
couldn't fathom. She appeared almost to be flirting with him. An impression
augmented by how grown-up her clothes were. He had noticed this before
about Finkler children. Their mothers dressed them in the height of adult
fashion, as though no opportunity to find a husband was to be forgone.

to whisper.'

seven.

paint your face for you?'

amused by her own joke.

Rude to whisper, Treslove thought, but not rude to be a fucking atheist at

'I know what,' Hephzibah said, 'why don't you ask Julian nicely and he'll

'Julian Nicely, will you paint my face for me?' the little girl said, much

'Funny in what way?'
'Different funny.'
'I see,' he said. By different did she mean not Finkler? Was it evident to a

child?

It was at this point that Hephzibah came over carrying paints. 'You two

seem to be hitting it off,' she said.

me for anderer. It's uncanny.'

'She knows I'm not unserer,' Treslove said under his breath. 'She's picked

Unserer, as Hephzibah's family used the word, meant Jewish. One of us.

Anderer was one of them. The enemy. The alien. Julian Treslove.

'That's nonsense,' Hephzibah said, under her breath.
'Why are you whispering?' the little girl asked. 'My daddy says it's rude

'No,' Treslove said.
The little girl's mouth fell open.
'Julian!' Hephzibah said.
'I can't.'
'Why can't you?'
'I can't, leave it at that.'
'Is this because you think she knows you're not unserer?'
'Don't be ridiculous. I just don't paint faces.'
'Paint hers for me. Look, she's upset.'
'I'm sorry if you're upset,' he said to the little girl. 'But you might as well

get used to the idea that we don't always get what we want.'

'Julian!'  Hephzibah  said  again.  'It's  only  face-painting.  She  isn't  asking

you to buy her a house.'

'She,' Treslove said, 'isn't asking for anything. It's you.'
'So I am to be taught a lesson in what not to expect from life?'
'I'm not teaching anyone anything. I just don't do face-paints.'
'Even though two young women are deeply upset by your refusal?'
'Don't be cute, Hep.'

'And don't you be objectionable. Just paint her fucking face.'
'No. How many more times must I say it? No. Face-painting is not my

scene. OK?'

Whereupon,  in  what  Hephzibah  was  to  describe  to  herself  as  a  most
unmanly fit of petulance, he swept out of the room and indeed out of the
house. When Hephzibah returned several hours later she found him in their
bed, his face turned to the wall.

Hephzibah was not a woman who allowed silences to build up. 'So what

was that about?' she asked.

'You know what it was about. I don't do face-painting.'
Hephzibah assumed this was code for I don't do your family.
'Fine,'  she  said.  'Then  would  you  please  stop  this  fantasy  about  how

wonderful you find us?'

Treslove assumed us was code for Finklers.
He didn't promise he would stop. But nor did he tell her she was wrong in

It  was  all  too  much  for  him  -  children,  parties,  face  paints,  families,

her assumption.

Finklers.

He had bitten off more than he could chew.

4

And  yet  he  was  more  them  than  they  were,  felt  more  for  them  and  what
they  stood  for  than  they,  as  far  he  could  see,  were  capable  of  feeling  for
themselves. He wouldn't have gone so far as to say they needed him, but
they did, didn't they? They needed him.

He had left the theatre seething with rage. On behalf of Hephzibah. On
behalf of Libor. On behalf of Finkler, whatever Finkler felt or pretended to
feel about the poison play. Why, he was even prepared to feel rage on behalf
of Abe, whose client called the Holocaust a holiday and wondered why he'd
lost his job while he was snorkelling in the Med.

Someone had to feel what he felt because on behalf of themselves what
did they feel? Not enough. Hephzibah he knew was angry and disconsolate
but preferred to look somewhere else. Finkler thought it was a joke. Libor
had turned his head away from everything and everyone. Leaving only him,
Julian Treslove, son of a melancholy and friendless cigar seller who played
the fiddle where no one could hear him; Julian Treslove, ex of the BBC, ex

arts administrator, one-time lover of a host of hopeless unfleshly girls who
wore too many bras, father of a sandwich-making in-denial homosexual and
a  Jew-hating  opportunist  piano  player;  Julian  Treslove,  Finklerphile  and
would-be Finkler except that the Finklers in their ethno-religious separatism
or whatever one was meant to call it just didn't fucking want to know.

Hard to go on feeling outrage for people who behaved to you exactly as
they were accused of behaving to everyone else precisely because of which
accusations you were outraged for them. Hard, but not impossible. Treslove
saw where this was taking him and refused to go there. A principle of truth
-  political  truth  and  art  truth  -  stood  beyond  such  personal  betrayals  and
disappointments.  Sons  of  Abraham,  like  much  else  of  its  kind,  was  a
travesty  of  dramatic  thought  because  it  lacked  imagination  of  otherness,
because  it  accorded  to  its  own  self-righteousness  a  supremacy  of  truth,
because it mistook propaganda for art, because it was rabble-rousing, and
Treslove owed it to himself, never mind his inadequately affronted friends,
not to be rabble-roused. He wished he had an arts programme to produce
again.  He  would  have  enjoyed  giving  Sons  -  as  it  was  no  doubt  called
within the fraternity - the once over at three o'clock in the morning.

Treslove's bit for honour and veracity.
'But are you saying Zionism is exempt from criticism? Are you denying
what we have seen with our own eyes on television?' the BBC bosses would
have asked him at programme review, as though he, Julian Treslove, son of
a  melancholy  and  friendless  cigar  seller  etc.,  had  suddenly  become
Zionism's spokesman, or truth was to be apprehended in ten seconds flat on
Newsnight,  or  humanity  was  incapable  of  addressing  one  wrong  without
instigating another.

He  knew  what  he  thought.  He  thought  there  would  be  no  settling  this
until there'd been another Holocaust. He could see because he was outside
it.  He  could  afford  to  see  what  they  -  his  friends,  the  woman  he  loved  -
dared  not.  The  Jews  would  not  be  allowed  to  prosper  except  as  they  had
always prospered, at the margins, in the concert halls and at the banks. End
of.  As  his  sons  said.  Anything  else  would  not  be  tolerated.  A  brave
rearguard  action  in  the  face  of  insuperable  odds  was  one  thing.  Anything
resembling victory and peace was another. It could not be borne, whether
by  Muslims  for  whom  Jews  were  a  sort  of  erroneous  and  lily-livered
brother,  always  to  be  kept  in  their  place,  or  by  Christians  to  whom  they
were anathema, or by themselves to whom they were an embarrassment.

That was the total of Treslove's findings after a year of being an adopted
Finkler in his own eyes if in no one else's - they didn't have a chance in hell.

Just as he didn't.
 

So that, at least, was something they were in together. Schtuck.

'In schtuck' was a favourite expression of his father's, a man who got by
essentially without expression. Remembering it recently, Treslove thought
the  word  must  have  been  Yiddish  and  his  father's  using  it  the  proof  that
something Jewish was trying to force its way out of him. Schtuck - it looked
Yiddish, it sounded Yiddish, and it meant something - a sort of sticky mess
- that only Yiddish could adequately express; but he didn't find the word in
any  of  the  museum's  Yiddish  dictionaries.  The  evidence  of  his  Jewish
antecedence proved as recalcitrant as ever. But in this at least he was a Jew
- he was in deep schtuck.

5

The  worst  times,  Libor  remembered,  were  the  mornings.  For  her  and  for
him, but it was her he was thinking about.

There  was  never  making  any  peace  with  it;  neither  had  what  could  be
called religious faith, both rejected false consolation, but there would be an
hour there when the lights were dim and he would lie by her side, stroking
her hair or holding her hand, not knowing if she was awake or asleep - but
he was thinking about her, not him - an hour when, awake or asleep, she
appeared to have accepted what she had no choice but to accept, and the
idea of returning to earth, or even to nothing, caught the quiet of assent.

She could smile at him in the night when the pain was eased. She could
look  deep  into  his  eyes,  beckon  him  to  her  and  whisper  what  he  thought
would be a fond memory into his ear, but which turned out to be a raucous
allusion,  an  obscenity  even.  She  wanted  him  to  laugh,  because  they  had
laughed  so  often  together.  He  had  made  her  laugh  at  the  beginning.
Laughter  had  been  his  most  precious  gift  to  her.  His  ability  to  make  her
laugh  was  the  reason  -  one  of  the  reasons  -  she  had  chosen  him  above
Horowitz. Laughter had never been at war with the softer emotions in her.
She  could  roar  and  be  gentle  in  the  same  breath.  And  now  she  wanted
laughter to be her final gift to him.

In the stealthy alternations of rudery and sweetness, somewhere between
waking and sleep, light and darkness, they found - she found, she found - a
modus mortis.

It was bearable, then. Not a peace or a resignation, but an engagement of
the fact of death with the fact of life. Though she was dying they were still
living,  together.  He  would  turn  the  lights  out  and  return  to  her  side  and
listen to her going off and know that she was living with dying.

But in the morning the horror of it returned. Not only the horror of the
pain and what she knew she must have looked like, but the horror of the
knowledge.

If Libor could only have spared her that knowledge! He would have died
for her to spare her that knowledge, only that would have been to burden
her with another, and she assured him, greater loss. He could not bear, when
morning broke, her waking up to what she had perhaps forgotten all about
while she slept. He imagined the finest division of time, the millionth of a
millionth  of  a  second  of  pure  mental  excruciation  in  which  the  terrible
incontrovertibility  of  her  finished  life  returned  to  her.  No  laughter  or
consoling  obscenities 
the  morning.  No
companionable  sorrowing  together  either.  She  lay  there  on  her  own,  not
wanting to hear from him, unavailable to him, staring up at the ceiling - as
though that was the route out she would finally take - seeing the ice-cold
certainty of her soon becoming nothing.

first  minutes  of 

The morning was always waiting for her. No matter where they had got
to the night before, no matter what quiet almost bearable illusion of living
with her dying he believed her to have attained, the morning always dashed
it.

So the morning was always waiting for Libor too. The morning waiting

for her to wake. And now the morning waiting for himself to wake.

He wished he'd been a believer. He wished they both had, though perhaps
one of them might have taken the other along. But belief had its underbelly
of doubting, too. How could it be otherwise? You would see the meaning in
the  night,  see  God's  face  even,  if  you  were  lucky  -  the  shechina:  he  had
always loved that concept, or the sound of it at least, God's refulgence - but
the next day, or the next, it would be gone. Faith wasn't a mystery to him;
the mystery to him was holding on to faith.

He kissed her eyes at night and tried to fall asleep himself in hope. But
things  didn't  get  better;  they  got  worse,  precisely  because  every  careful

in 

the 

crafting of feeling better, of assent, submission, accommodation - he didn't
have  the  word  -  survived  no  more  than  a  single  night.  Nothing  was  ever
settled. Nothing ever sealed. The day began again as though the horror had
that very moment been borne in on her for the first time.

And on him.

6

Tyler's life was over much more quickly. A brisk woman in all her dealings,
including her adulteries, she dealt in a businesslike manner with death. She
arranged  what  needed  arranging,  left  instructions,  demanded  certain
promises of Finkler, took as unemotional a farewell of her children as she
could  bear  to  take,  shook  hands  with  Finkler  as  over  a  deal  that  had  not
worked out wonderfully but had not worked out too badly either, all things
considered, and died.

'Is this all I get?' Finkler wanted to shake her and say.
But over time he discovered there were things she had wanted to say to
him,  matter  she  had  wanted  to  bring  up,  but  had  not,  either  for  fear  of
upsetting  him  or  for  fear  of  upsetting  herself.  Not  tender  things  or
sentimental matter - though he continued to find letters he had written to her
and  photographs  of  them  both  and  of  the  family  which  she  had  bundled
prettily and tied with ribbons and kept in places he presumed to be sacred -
but issues of a practical and even argumentative nature, souvenirs of their
disagreements, such as the documents relating to her conversion to Judaism,
and a number of articles he had written which she had, unknown to him,
annotated and filed, and a tape of the broadcast of Desert Island Discs in
which  he  had  announced  his  shame  to  the  world  and  for  which  she  had
never, and never would for all eternity, she had vowed, forgive him.

In a box marked 'To Be Opened By My Husband When I Have Gone',
which at first he thought she might have prepared prior to going in a more
mundane  sense  -  had  she  ever  seriously  thought  of  leaving  him?  he
wondered  -  he  found  photographs  of  him  as  a  nice  Jewish  boy  being  bar
mitzvahed,  and  photographs  of  him  as  a  nice  Jewish  bridegroom  being
married to her, and photographs of him as a nice Jewish father at the bar
mitzvahs of his sons (these in an envelope bearing a large? as though to ask
why,  why,  Shmuelly,  did  you  consent  to  any  of  these  ceremonials  if  you
intended to shit on them?), together with a number of articles on the Jewish

faith  and  on  Zionism,  some  written  by  him,  and  heavily  annotated  again,
some  written  by  other  journalists  and  scholars,  and  one  short  typewritten
manuscript, expostulatory, overpunctuated, and tidied-up in a plastic folder,
like homework, the author of which was none other than Tyler Finkler, his
wife.

Finkler folded himself in two and wept when he found this.
She  was  too  overwrought  to  be  a  good  writer,  Finkler  had  always
thought.  Finkler  himself  was  no  stylist,  but  he  knew  how  to  make  a
sentence  trot  along.  A  reviewer  of  one  of  Finkler's  first  self-help  books  -
Finkler wasn't sure whether he meant to be kind or unkind, so he took it for
the former - described reading his prose as being like taking a train journey
in the company of someone who might have been a genius, but then might
just as easily have been a halfwit. Tyler's writing did not veer between these
extremes. Reading her was like being on a train journey with an indubitably
clever person who had given her life to composing messages on greetings
cards.  A  criticism,  as  it  happens,  that  had  been  levelled  at  Finkler's  early
bestseller The  Socratic  Flirt:  How  to  Reason  Your  Way  into  a  Better  Sex
Life.

Tyler had had a sudden insight into her husband, that was what made her
put  her  thoughts  on  paper.  He  was  too  Jewish.  He  didn't  suffer  from  an
insufficiency of Jewish thought or temperament, but the opposite. They all
did,  these  Shande  Jews.  (Shande  Jews  was  her  name  for  the  ASHamed.
Shande means shame as in disgrace, and that was what she thought about
them. That they brought shame.) But he, the pompous prick, more than the
others.

'The thing with my husband,' she wrote, as if to a divorce lawyer, though
Finkler  himself  was  the  addressee,  'is  that  he  thinks  he  has  jumped  the
Jewish fence his father put around him, but he still sees everything from a
WHOLLY  Jewish  point  of  view,  including  the  Jews  who  disappoint  him.
Wherever he looks, in Jerusalem or Stamford Hill or Elstree, he sees Jews
living no better than anybody else. And because they are not exceptionally
good, it follows - to his extremist Jewish logic - that they are exceptionally
bad!  Just  like  the  conventional  Jews  he  scorns  to  spite  his  father,  my
husband adheres with arrogance to the principle that Jews either exist to be
"a light unto the nations" (Isaiah 42: 6) or don't deserve to exist at all.'

Finkler  cried  a  couple  more  times.  Not  because  of  what  his  wife  had
charged  him  with,  but  because  of  the  childlike  conscientiousness  of  her

He  had  at  no  time  been  sympathetic  to  Tyler's  Jewish  aspirations.  He
didn't  need  to  be  married  to  a  Jew.  He  was  Jew  enough  -  at  least  in  his
antecedence - for both of them. Fine, he'd said when she told him what she
intended  to  do.  He  assumed  she  wanted  a  Jewish  wedding.  What  woman
didn't want a Jewish wedding? Fine.

So off she went to talk to the rabbis and when she told him she would
take  the  Reform  route  he  nodded  without  listening.  She  could  have  been
describing a bus journey she was planning. It would take about a year, she
said, perhaps more for her because she was starting from scratch. Fine, he
said. Take as long as you like. It wasn't that this gave him time to be with
his mistresses. He had not yet married Tyler - she wouldn't marry him until
she  was  a  Jew  -  and  so  mistresses  were  not  yet  in  the  picture.  He  was  a
scrupulous man. He would not have taken a mistress before he had a wife.
Another  woman  yes,  a  mistress  no.  He  was  a  philosopher;  nomenclature
mattered to him. So there was no motive for his indifference. He was unable
to put his mind to Tyler getting a Jewish education for the pure and simple
reason that he couldn't have cared less.

Bible citations. He could see her bent over the page, concentrating. Perhaps
reaching for a Bible to be sure she had cited Isaiah correctly. It made him
think of her as a little girl at Sunday school, reading about the Jews with a
pencil in her mouth, not knowing that one day she would marry and give
her  life  to  one,  and  become  a  Jew  herself,  though  not  in  the  eyes  of
Orthodox Jews like his father. And maybe not even in the eyes of Finkler
either.

She went to classes once a week for fourteen months. There she learned
Hebrew, he gathered, was told God knows what about the Bible, told what
not to eat, told what not to wear, told what not to say, taught how to run a
Jewish home and be a Jewish mother, paraded before a council of rabbis,
submerged (at her own insistence) in water - and lo! he had a Jewish bride.
He didn't listen when she came back each week and tried to interest him in
what  she'd  learned.  His  life  was  more  interesting.  He  nodded  his  head,
waited for her to finish, then told her he'd been to see a publisher. He hadn't
yet written a book, but he felt he needed a publisher. He was on the way.
People  were  taking  notice.  She  wanted  a  Moses  to  lead  her  into  the
Promised Land? He was that Moses. She should just follow him.

So little notice did he take of her studies that she might have been having
an  affair  with  one  of  the  rabbis  for  all  he  knew.  These  things  happened.

Rabbis,  too,  were  men  of  flesh  and  blood.  And  teaching  was  .  .  .  well
Finkler, knew as well as anyone what teaching was.

He wouldn't begrudge her if she had. Now that she was dead he wanted
her to have had a better life than he had given her. No husband is ever more
magnanimous, he thought, than when he becomes a widower. There was an
article in that.

It was in her conversion class, presumably, that she had been told about
the  Jewish  aspiration  to  be  'a  light  unto  the  nations'.  Had  they  -  had  the
rabbi  he  wished  to  have  been  in  love  with  her  and  who  he  hoped  had
secretly  taken  her  to  kosher  restaurants  to  teach  her  how  to  eat  lokshen
pudding - had he shown her how to put a little bracket around the chapter
and verse that she was citing?

Poor Tyler.
(Tyler  Finkler  49:  3)  The  age  at  which  she  died  and  the  number  of

children she had left motherless.

It broke his heart. But that didn't mean he cared to go on reading. The last
thing  he  wanted  to  remember  about  his  wife  was  her  baby  Hebrew
education.  He  put  her  little  essay  back  into  its  folder,  blew  it  a  kiss,  and
stored the box it came in at the bottom of her wardrobe, where she had kept
her shoes.

Only  on  the  night  he  returned  from  accompanying  Hephzibah  and
Treslove to Sons of Abraham did the impulse to look at it again seize him.
He  couldn't  have  said  why.  Maybe  he  was  lonely  without  her.  Maybe  he
was  desperate  to  hear  her  voice.  Or  maybe  he  just  needed  something,
anything, to stop him going to his computer and playing poker.

Her argument was as he remembered but he felt more tenderly towards it
now.  It  can  take  time  for  a  husband  to  discover  that  his  wife's  words  are
worth attending to.

She had hit upon a paradox.
(Think of it - Tyler hitting on a paradox! The things of which a husband

does not know his wife to be capable!)

Her paradox was this:
'The Shande Jews my husband spends his evenings with, (when he isn't
spending them with his mistress), accuse Israelis and those they call 'Zionist
fellow-travellers'  of  thinking  they  enjoy  a  special  moral  status  which
entitles  them  to  treat  everyone  else  like  shit;  but  this  accusation  is  itself
founded  on  the  assumption  that  Jews  enjoy  a  special  moral  status  and

should know better. (Do you remember what you used to say to the kids,
Shmuel, when they complained they were being told off for doing nothing
different to what other kids did? "I judge you by a more exacting standard,"
you  told  them.  Why?  Why  do  you  -  you  of  all  people  -  judge  Jews  by  a
more exacting standard?)'

Her own 'wise' husband had told her that the state of Israyel - a state he
could not bear to name without putting in a derisive y - had been founded
on  an  act  of  brutal  expropriation.  So  what  state  wasn't?  Tyler  asked,
mentioning the American Indian and the Australian Aborigine.

Finkler smiled. Fancy Tyler, in her jewellery and furs, caring about the

Australian Aborigine.

She saw it this way . . .
The cheek of her! She saw it this way. Tyler Gallagher, the granddaughter
of Irish tinkers, who won a prize at Sunday school when she was eight years
old for a drawing of the baby Jesus holding out his podgy hands to take his
Christmas presents from the Three Wise Men. Telling him how she saw it.

This,  anyway,  was  the  way  it  looked  to  her,  whatever  her  husband

thought.

'For pogrom after pogrom Jews bowed their heads and held on. God had
picked them for His own. God would help them. The Holocaust - yes, yes,
here we go, Shmuelly, Holocaust, Holocaust!! - the Holocaust changed all
that FOREVER. Jews finally woke up to being on their own. They had to
look out for themselves. And that meant having their own country. In fact
they  already  had  it,  but  let's  not  get  into  that,  Mr  Palestine.  They  had  to
have their own country and when you have your own country you become
different from who you were before you had your own country. You become
like  everybody  else!  Only  you  and  your  cronies  won't  let  them  be  like
everybody else, because for you, Shmuel, they are still obliged to obey the
God (in whom you don't believe!) and be an example to the world!

'Explain to your poor, uneducated, would-be Jewish wife why else you
can't  leave  the  Jews  of  the  country  I've  even  heard  you  call  Canaan,  you
sick fucker, alone? Are you afraid that if you don't get in with your criticism
early,  worse  will  come  from  somewhere  else?  Is  yours  some  perverted
patriotism that burns up territory you're afraid of losing so that it won't fall
into enemy hands??

'Answer  me  this:  Why  don't  you  mind  your  own  fucking  business,
Shmuel? You won't be judged alongside Israyelis unless you choose to be.

You  have  your  country,  they  have  theirs  -  a  fact,  to  quote  you  on  being
married to me, that "invites neither exceptional sympathy nor exceptional
censure". They are now just ordinary bastards, half right, half wrong, like
the rest of us.

'Because even you, my false, beloved husband, are not ALL wrong.'
 

This time he didn't fold her little essay away but sat with it awhile in front
of him. Poor Tyler. Which he knew very well was Finkler-speak for poor
him. He missed her. They'd fought and fought but there had always been
companionableness  in  it.  He  had  never  raised  his  hand  to  her,  nor  she  to
him. They had always talked everything through, the sound of each other's
voice a daily source of unremarked pleasure to them both. He would have
loved to hear her voice now. What he would have given to be able to go out
into their now neglected garden with her and put his finger on the knot of
green string she was always asking him to help her tie.

They  had  not  been  together  long  enough  for  it  to  be  one  of  the  great
marital  adventures,  akin  to  that  enjoyed  by  Libor  and  Malkie,  but  they'd
been  on  an  enjoyable  trek  together.  And  they'd  brought  up  three  smart
children, no matter that some were smarter than others.

He  sat  and  cried  a  little.  Tears  were  good  in  that  they  were
undiscriminating. He didn't have to know for whom or what he wept. He
wept for everything.

He liked Tyler's point about his being a patriot, burning up what he was
afraid of losing. He didn't know if it was true but he liked the idea. So was
Tamara the same? Were all the ASHamed Jews killing the thing they loved
for fear of its falling into the enemy's hands?

Tyler's was as good a guess as any. Something had to explain the queer,
passionate  hatred  of  these  people.  Self-hate  certainly  didn't  get  it.  Self-
haters would surely go about in surly isolation, but the ASHamed sought
out one another's company, cheered one another on, expressed their feelings
as a group activity, as soldiers might on the eve of battle. It could easily be,
in that case, just as poor Tyler had described it, another version of the old
beleaguered  Jewish  tribalism.  The  enemy  remained  who  the  enemy  had
always been. The others. This was just the latest tactic in the age-old war.
To kill our own before the others could.

Certainly,  Finkler  never  once  came  away  from  their  meetings  without
feeling exactly as he had felt when accompanying his father to synagogue -

that  the  world  was  too  Jewish  for  him,  too  old,  too  communal  in  an
anthropological, almost primal sense - too far back, too deep down, too long
ago.

He was a thinker who didn't know what he thought, except that he had
loved and failed and now missed his wife, and that he hadn't escaped what
was oppressive about Judaism by joining a Jewish group that gathered to
talk feverishly about the oppressiveness of being Jewish. Talking feverishly
about being Jewish was being Jewish.

 

He  stayed  up  late  watching  television,  trying  to  stay  away  from  his
computer. Enough with the poker.

But  poker  served  a  purpose.  T.  S.  Eliot  told  Auden  that  the  reason  he
played patience night after night was that it was the nearest thing to being
dead.

Patience, poker . . . What difference?

TWELVE

1

It  was  thought  that  Meyer  Abramsky  had  been  suffering  from  severe
depression. He had seven children and his wife was heavy with his eighth.
He had been told by the Israeli army to prepare to remove his family from
the settlement he had helped to found, in accordance with God's promise,
sixteen years before. He had travelled from Brooklyn with his young wife
in  order  to  keep  his  bargain  with  God.  And  they  were  doing  this  to  him!
Assistance  would  be  given  to  rehouse  him,  and  consideration  would  be
shown  to  his  wife's  condition.  But  the  settlement  had  to  go.  Thus  spake
Obama.

It  was  agreed  that  they  would  not  go  quietly,  not  any  of  them.  To  go
quietly would be to accede to blasphemy. This was their land. They didn't
have to share it, they didn't have to do deals to secure it, it was theirs. He
could point to the verse in the Torah where it said so. There the promise,
there the place. Why, if you looked closely and read as you were meant to
read,  Meyer  Abramsky's  house  itself  was  mentioned.  There.  Right  there
where the page was worn thin with pointing.

After  threatening  to  barricade  his  family  in  their  house  and  shoot
whoever  tried  to  move  them  -  never  mind  that  they  were  fellow  Jews;
fellow  Jews  do  not  eject  their  own  people  from  sacred  land  -  Meyer
Abramsky  read  about  himself  in  the  newspapers.  There  was  talk  of  his
succumbing  to  a  'siege  mentality'.  Siege  mentality!  What  else  did  they
expect?  It  wasn't  only  Meyer  Abramsky  who  was  under  seige,  it  was  the
entire Jewish people.

He never did carry out his threat to shoot the Israeli soldiers who ejected
him. Instead, he boarded a bus and shot an Arab family. A mother, a father,
a  baby.  One,  two,  three  bullets.  One,  two,  three  victims.  Thus  spake  the
Lord.

2

It was not known whether Libor read about the incident and was affected by
it. It seemed unlikely. Libor had not read a newspaper for weeks.

Whether he bought a paper to read on the train to Eastbourne isn't known
either. Had he done so he would certainly have seen photographs of Meyer
Abramsky on the front pages. But by that time Libor had already made his
decision. Why else would he have taken the train to Eastbourne?

He  sat  opposite  Treslove's  son  Alfredo  on  the  train  without  either
knowing who the other was. Only later did this emerge, causing Treslove to
unwind a chain of improbable causality at the end of which he found his
guilt. Had Treslove been a better father and not fallen out with Alfredo he
might have had him round to dinner at Hephzibah's where he would have
met Libor, and had he met Libor he would have recognised him on the train
and then . . .

So Treslove was to blame.
Alfredo  was  travelling  to  Eastbourne  with  his  dinner  jacket  in  his
overnight bag. He would be playing 'Happy Birthday' and similar requests
at the best hotel in Eastbourne that night.

He thought the old man sitting opposite him was yellow. He must have
been  about  a  hundred,  he  said.  Alfredo  didn't  like  old  men  much.  These
things  probably  start  with  fathers  and  Alfredo  didn't  like  his  father.  In
answer  to  the  question  of  whether  the  old  man  sitting  opposite  him
appeared anxious or depressed he repeated that he looked about a hundred -
how else are you going to look at that age but anxious and depressed? He
didn't talk to the old man other than to offer him a peppermint, which was
refused, and to ask where he was going.

'Eastbourne,' the old man told him.
Yes, obviously Eastbourne, but where specifically? To stay with family?
A hotel? (Alfredo hoped not the hotel he was playing at, which had an old
enough clientele already.)

'Nowhere,' the old man told him.
Libor was more precise in his instructions to the taxi driver when he got

. .?

'Bitchy 'Ead.'

to Eastbourne. 'Bitchy 'Ead,' he said.

'Do you mean Beachy Head?' the driver asked.
'What did I just say?' Libor answered. 'Bitchy 'Ead!'
Did he want to be dropped anywhere in particular? The pub, the lookout .

The  driver  who  had  a  father  of  his  own  and  knew  that  old  men  were
made  irritable  by  age  explained  that  if  he  wanted  him  to  wait  he  would.
Otherwise he could ring for him to come back and collect him. 'Or there's a
bus,' he said. 'A 12a.'

'Not necessary,' Libor said.
'Well, if you do need me,' the driver insisted, handing him his card.
Libor put the card in his pocket without looking at it.

3

He drank a whisky in the slate-floored pub, sitting at a small round table
looking out to sea. He thought it was the identical table to the one he and
Malkie had sat at on the day they drove here long ago to test each other's
courage,  but  he  might  have  been  wrong  about  that.  It  didn't  matter.  The
view was the same, the coast swirling away to the west, flinty and ancient,
the sea colourless but for the thin line of silver on the horizon.

He  drank  another  whisky  then  left  the  pub  and  climbed  slowly  up  the
downlands, bent as the trees and shrubs were bent. With no sun on them,
the cliffs looked grimy, a mass of dirty chalk crumbling into the sea.

'You'd need some nerve to do this,' he remembered saying to Malkie.
Malkie had fallen silent, thinking about it. 'The dark would be best,' she
had said at last, as they'd strolled back, arm in arm. 'I'd wait till it was dark
and just keep on walking.'

He passed the little pile of stones, like something Jacob or Isaac might
have built, with the plaque on which Psalm 93 was engraved. Mightier than
the thunder of many waters, mightier than the waves of the sea. The Lord on
high is mighty.

It  seemed  to  him  there  were  fewer  of  the  randomly  planted  wooden
crosses than he remembered. There should, surely, have been more. Unless,
after a decent period of time, they were removed.

What was a decent period of time?
But again, tied to a scrap of wire fencing, there was a bunch of flowers.
This one was from Marks & Spencer, with the price tag attached. PS4.99.
Don't splash out, he thought.

The  place  was  not  isolated.  A  bus  had  unloaded  a  party  of  pensioners.
People walked their dogs and flew kites. Peered over. Shuddered. A hiking
couple said hello to him. But it was very quiet, the wind blowing voices off

 

the  edge.  He  heard  a  sheep.  'Baaa.'  Unless  it  was  a  seagull.  And
remembered home.

There was no evidence to support Malkie's fanciful conviction that it would
take  her  beloved  husband  an  unconscionable  time  to  reach  the  bottom.
Despite her believing she had married an exceptional man, he didn't fly or
float. He went straight down like anybody else.

4

Treslove  learned  that  Alfredo  had  been  sitting  opposite  Libor  on  the
Eastbourne  train  from  Alfredo's  mother.  Alfredo  had  seen  Libor's
photograph on the South East television news - veteran journalist plunges to
his death in Beachy Head's third suicide in a month - and realised it was the
hundred-year-old man he had talked to on the train. This he mentioned to
his mother, and this his mother took the trouble to communicate to Treslove
when she herself read the dead man's name in the paper and recognised him
as a friend of the father of her son.

'Strange  coincidence,'  she  said  in  the  same  BBC  voice  with  which  she

used to unpack rafts of ideas and unpick Treslove's sanity.

'Strange how?'
'Alfredo and your friend on the same train.'
'That's a coincidence. What makes it strange?'
'Two people from your past coming together.'
'Libor isn't from my past.'
'Everybody's from your past, Julian. That's where you put people.'
'Fuck you,' Treslove told her, ringing off.
He didn't hear of Libor's death this way. Had he done so he didn't know
what  violence  he  might  have  committed  on  Alfredo  and  Josephine.  He
didn't  want  them  in  the  same  breath  or  sentence  as  poor  Libor,  he  didn't
wish to think of them as having even shared existence with him. The fool of
a boy should have seen something was wrong, should have engaged the old
man in conversation, should have told someone. This wasn't any old train.
You were meant to scrutinise people travelling alone to Eastbourne because
there was just about only one reason why a single person would choose to
go there.

He felt the same about the taxi driver. Who takes a lonely old man to a
noted suicide spot in the late afternoon and leaves him? In fact, the driver
thought this very thing about an hour after dropping Libor off and notified
the  police,  but  by  then  it  was  too  late.  This,  as  much  as  anything  else,
distressed  Treslove  -  that  his  friend's  last  hour  on  earth  had  been  spent
staring at that cretin Alfredo in his pork-pie hat and discussing the weather
with a numbskull Eastbourne taxi driver.

But he couldn't go on blaming other people. It was his fault in more ways
than he could number. He had neglected Libor in recent months, thinking
only about himself. And when he had spent time with him it was only to
talk sexual jealousy. You don't talk sexual jealousy - you don't, if you have a
grain of tact or discretion in your body, talk sexual anything to an old man
who has recently lost the woman he had been in love with all his life. That
was  gross.  And  it  was  grosser  still  -  worse  than  gross:  it  was  brutal  -  to
burden Libor with the knowledge of his affair with Tyler. That was a secret
Treslove  should  have  taken  to  the  grave,  as  he  supposed  Tyler  had.  And
Libor himself.

It wasn't out of the question that this uncalled-for confession was among
the  reasons  Libor  had  ended  his  life  -  so  that  he  didn't  have  to  bear  his
friend's turpitude any longer. Treslove had seen Libor's face blacken when
he'd bragged - let's call a spade a spade, it was bragging - about those stolen
afternoons with Finkler's wife; he had seen the lights go out in the old man's
eyes. It seemed to be a villainy too far for Libor. Treslove had blemished,
discredited,  defiled,  the  story  of  the  three  men's  long-standing  friendship,
turned the trust between them, whatever their differences, into a fiction, a
delusion, a lie.

Falsities spill over. Perhaps it wasn't only the romance of their friendship
that  Treslove  had  defiled;  perhaps  it  was  the  idea  of  romance  altogether.
Once one cherished illusion goes, what's to stop the next? Had Treslove and
Tyler's iniquity poisoned everything?

No, that in itself could not have not killed Libor. But who was to say it

hadn't weakened his resolve to stay alive?

Treslove  would  have  admitted  all  this  to  Hephzibah,  begged  for
absolution in her arms, but to have done that he would have had to tell her,
too, about Tyler, and that was something he couldn't do.

She  was  in  a  bad  way  herself.  Though  it  was  Libor  who  had  brought
Treslove and Hephzibah together, Treslove in his turn had made Libor more

important  to  her  than  he  had  previously  been.  There  had  always  been  a
fondness between them, but great-great-nieces are rarely intimate with their
great-great-uncles.  In  her  time  with  Treslove,  though,  this  old,  somewhat
formal affection had blossomed into love, to the point where she was unable
to  remember  not  having  him  there,  close  to  her,  reminding  her  of  Aunt
Malkie,  and  making  her  love  for  Julian  almost  a  family  affair.  She,  too,
castigated herself for allowing other concerns to consume her attention. She
should have been keeping an eye on Libor.

But  these  other  concerns  would  not  let  her  alone.  The  murder  of  that
Arab  family  on  a  bus  was  an  unbearable  event.  She  didn't  know  anyone
who wasn't horrified. Horrified on behalf of the Arabs. Horrified for them.
But, yes, horrified as well in anticipation of the consequences. Jews were
being depicted everywhere as bloodthirsty monsters, however the history of
Zionism was explained - whether bloodthirsty in their seizure of someone
else's  country  from  the  start,  or  bloodthirsty  as  a  consequence  of  events
which bit by bit had made them strangers to compassion - yet no Jew was
cheering the death of this Arab family, not in the streets nor in the quiet of
their  homes,  no  Jewish  women  gathered  by  the  wells  and  ululated  their
jubilation, no Jewish men went to the synagogue to dance their thanks to
the  Almighty.  Thou  shalt  not  kill.  They  could  say  what  they  liked,  the
libellers  and  hate-mongers,  stigmatising  Jews  as  racists  and  supremacists,
thou shalt not kill was emblazoned on the hearts of Jews.

And Jewish soldiers?
Well, Meyer Abramsky was no Jewish soldier. He vexed her moral sense
in no way at all. It was only a pity he had been stoned to death. She would
have liked to see him tried and found a thousand times guilty by Jews. He is
not one of ours.

And then stoned to death by those whose moral character he had fouled.
A  monument  would  eventually  be  erected  in  his  name,  of  course.  The
settlers had to have their heroes. Who were these people? Where had they
suddenly appeared from? They were alien to her education and upbringing.
They had nothing to do with any Jewishness she recognised. They were the
children of a universal unreason, of the same extraction as suicide bombers
and  all  the  other  End  of  Time  death  cultists  and  apocalyptics,  not  the
children of Abraham whose name they defamed. But try telling that to those
who  had  taken  to  the  streets  and  squares  of  London  again,  ready  at  a
moment's  notice  with  their  chants  and  placards  as  though  they  woke  to

speak violence against the one country in the world of which the majority of
the population was Jewish and were disappointed when a fresh day brought
no justification for it.

It had started again, anyway. Her emails streamed reported menace and
invective.  A  brick  was  thrown  through  a  window  of  the  museum.  An
Orthodox man in his sixties was beaten up at a bus stop in Temple Fortune.
Graffiti  began  to  appear  again  on  synagogue  walls,  the  Star  of  David
crossed with the swastika. The Internet bubbled and boiled with madness.
She couldn't bear to open a newspaper.
Was it something or was it nothing?
Meanwhile  there  had  to  be  a  coroner's  inquest  into  Libor's  death.  And
more searching questions to be answered in their hearts by those who had
loved him.

She knew what she thought. She thought Libor had gone for a walk at
dusk - without doubt a lonely, melancholy walk, but just a walk - and had
fallen. People do fall. Not everything is deliberated upon.

Libor fell.

5

'The  hardest  part,'  Finkler  told  Treslove,  'is  not  to  be  defined  by  one's
enemies. Just because I am no longer an ASHamed Jew does not mean I
have relinquished my prerogative to be ashamed.'

'Why bring being ashamed into it at all?'
'You sound like my poor wife.'
'Do I?' Treslove, head down, blushed.
Finkler, thankfully, did not notice. ' "What's it to you?" she used to ask
me. "How does it reflect on you?" But it does. It reflects on me because I
expect better.'

'Isn't that grandiosity?'
'Ha!  My  wife  again.  You  didn't  discuss  me  with  her,  did  you?  That's  a
rhetorical question. No, I don't think it's grandiosity to take what that lunatic
Abramsky did personally. If any man's death diminishes me, because I am
of mankind, then any man's act of murder does the same.'

'Then be diminished as a member of mankind. The grandiosity is to feel

diminished as a Jew.'

Finkler clapped an arm around his friend's shoulder. 'I'll be paid out as a

Jew,' he said, 'whatever you think.'

He  smiled  weakly,  seeing  Treslove  in  a  yarmulke.  The  two  men  had
walked aside, leaving Libor's family to be at his graveside with him, alone.
The  service  had  concluded,  but  Hephzibah  and  a  number  of  others  had
wanted time to reflect away from the attentions of gravediggers and rabbis.
When they had gone, Treslove and Finkler would have their hour.

They  would  rather  not  have  talked  about  Abramsky.  About  Abramsky
there was nothing civilised to say. But they held back from discussing Libor
because they were afraid of their feelings. Treslove, especially, was unable
to  look  at  the  ground  in  which  Libor  -  still  warm,  was  how  he  imagined
him, still aggrieved and hurt - had been laid. Next to his mound of earth was
Malkie's  grave.  The  thought  of  them  lying  side  by  side,  silent  for  all
eternity, no laughter, no obscenities, no music, was more than he could bear.
Would he and Hephzibah . . .? Would he be allowed to lie in a Jewish
cemetery at all? They had already asked. All depended. If she wanted to be
buried  where  her  parents  were  buried,  in  a  cemetery  administered  by  the
Orthodox, Treslove would probably be refused the right to be buried next to
her. If, however . . . So many complications when you took up with a Jew,
as Tyler had discovered. It was a shame she wasn't still here to ask. 'In the
matter of sleeping-over rights, Tyler . . .?'

Libor and Malkie had wanted to be buried in the same grave, one above
the other, but there had been objections to that, as there were objections to
everything, in death as in life, though no one was sure whether on religious
grounds  or  simply  because  the  earth  was  too  stony  to  take  a  grave  deep
enough for two. And anyway, Malkie had joked, they would only end up
fighting  over  who  was  to  be  on  top.  So  they  lay  democratically,  side  by
side, in their decorous Queen-size bed.

Hephzibah  signalled  that  she  and  the  family  were  leaving.  She  looked
rather  wonderful,  Treslove  thought,  in  veiled,  shawled  black,  like  a
Victorian widow. A majestic relict. Treslove motioned that they would stay
a little. The two men took each other's arms. Treslove was grateful for the
support.  He  thought  his  legs  would  give  way  beneath  him.  He  was  not
framed for cemeteries. They spoke too vividly to him of the end of love.

Had he looked around he would have been struck by the lack of statuary
eloquence. A Jewish cemetery is a blank, mute place. As though by the time

one reaches here there is nothing further to be said. But he kept his eyes to
the ground, hoping to see nothing.

The  two  men  stood  silently  together,  like  headstones  themselves.  'To

what base uses we may return,' Finkler said after a while.

'I'm sorry,' Treslove said, 'I can't play. Not today.'
'Fair enough. It wasn't my intention to be flippant.'
'I know,' Treslove said. 'I wouldn't accuse you of that. I don't doubt you

loved him as much as I did.'

differently?' Finkler asked.

him.

Silence  again  between  them.  Then,  'So  what  could  we  have  done

Treslove was surprised. That category of question normally belonged to

'Watched over him.'
'Would he have let us?'
'Had we done it as it should have been done he wouldn't have noticed.'
'Strange,' Finkler mused, not meaning to disagree, 'but I felt he left us.'
'Well, he's done that all right.'
'I mean earlier.'
'How much earlier?'
'When Malkie died. Didn't you think that when Malkie died he stopped?'
Treslove  thought  about  it.  'No,  that's  not  how  I  felt  it,'  he  said.  For
Treslove a woman's death was a beginning. He was a man made to mourn.
He had always imagined himself bent double, like the aged Thomas Hardy,
revisiting the torn haunts of love. If anything, he had found Libor a touch
vigorous after Malkie died. He would have cut a more distraught, tormented
figure  himself.  'To  me,'  he  went  on,  'it  seemed  that  he  left  when  I  got
together with Hephzibah.'

'Now who's being grandiose?' Finkler said. 'Do you think he thought his

earthly task was done then, or what?'

If Finkler thought that was grandiose, what would he say if he ever found
out that Treslove thought Libor had committed suicide because of what he
knew about his and Tyler's adultery? Not that he ever would find that out.
Supposing, of course, that he didn't already know.

'No, of course not that. But my new beginning, for what it is' - why did I
say that, Treslove wondered, why the apology? - 'my new beginning with
Hephzibah might have made him think there could be no new beginnings
for him.'

'He should have palled out with me more in that case,' Finkler said. 'I'd

have kept him company in no new beginnings.'

'Oh, come on.'
'Oh, come on nothing. We couldn't have competed with you. Yours was a
beginning to end beginnings. You weren't a widower. You weren't even a
divorcee.  You  started  from  scratch.  New  woman,  new  religion.  Me  and
Libor were dead men inhabiting a dead faith. You took both our souls on
two  counts.  Good  luck  to  you.  We  had  no  use  for  them.  But  you  can't
pretend the three of us were ever in anything together. We weren't the Three
Musketeers. We died so that you could live, Julian. If that isn't too Christian
a thought in such a place. You tell me.'

'What do I know, except that you ain't no dead man, Sam.'
Or was he? Sam the Dead Man. Treslove didn't dare raise his eyes from
the earth to look at his friend. He hadn't seen him since they'd got here. He
hadn't  seen  anything  or  anyone  -  except  of  course  Hephzibah  whom  he
couldn't miss.

'Well,  of  the  two  of  us-'  Finkler  began,  but  he  was  unable  to  finish.  A
third person had arrived at the graveside. She stood quietly, anxious not to
disturb their conversation. After a moment, she bent and took a handful of
soil which she sprinkled like seeds on the mound of earth.

The men fell quiet, making her self-conscious. 'I'm sorry,' she said. 'I'll

come back.'

'Please don't,' Finkler said. 'We're going in a minute ourselves.'
Before  she  rose,  Treslove  was  able  to  get  a  look  at  her.  An  elderly
woman, but not aged, elegant, her head covered with a light scarf, poised,
not unaccustomed to Jewish cemeteries and funerals, he thought. This much
Treslove had discovered: the Jewish faith frightened even Jews. Only a few
were at home in all the ceremonials. This woman was not awed, even by
death.

'Are you a relative?' Finkler asked. He wanted to tell her that the family

had been and left, and that if she wanted to join them . . .

She  stood,  without  difficulty,  and  shook  her  head.  'Just  a  long-time

friend,' she said.

dry Finkler was.

'Us too,' Treslove said.
'This is a very sad day,' the woman said.
She was dry-eyed. Dryer by far than Treslove. He couldn't have said how

'Heartbreaking,' he said. Finkler added his assent.
They found themselves walking away from the grave together. 'My name

is Emmy Oppenstein,' the woman said.

The two men introduced themselves to her. There were no handshakes.
Treslove liked that. The Jews were good at making one occasion not like
another, he thought. The protocol alarmed him but he admired it. Good to
divide this from that. Why is this night different from all other nights. Or
was it good? They pursued difference to the grave.

'How long is it since either of you saw him?' Emmy Oppenstein enquired.
She wanted to know how he had been in the time before his death. She
herself  had  not  seen  him  for  many  months,  but  they  had  spoken  on  the
phone a few times more recently than that.

'In  the  normal  course  of  events  you  saw  a  lot  of  him,  then?'  Treslove

asked. Annoyed for Malkie.

'No, not at all. In the normal course of events I saw him once every half

century.'
'Ah.'
'I made contact with him again after all that time because I needed his
help. I suppose I'm wanting to hear that I didn't put more pressure on him
than he could bear.'

'Well, he never said anything,' Treslove told her. He wanted to add that
Libor  had  never  so  much  as  mentioned  her  existence,  but  he  couldn't  be
quite so cruel to a woman her age.

'And did you get his help?' Finkler asked.
She hesitated. 'I got his company,' she said. 'But his help, no, I don't think

I can say he was able to give me that.'

'Not like him.'
'No, that was what I thought. Though of course after such a long time I
was in no position to know what he was like. But it hurt him to refuse me, I
thought.  The  strange  thing  was  that  it  felt  as  though  he  wanted  it  to  hurt
him. And of course it saddens me deeply to think I was in some way the
agency of his hurting himself.'

'We are all punishing ourselves with that sadness,' Finkler said.
'Are you? I'm sorry to hear that. But that's a natural thing for friends to
feel. I hadn't been a friend for so long I have no right, and indeed had no
right, to think of myself as one. But I needed a favour.'

She told them, in the end, what the favour was. Told them about the work
she did, about what she feared, about the Jew-hatred which was beginning
to infect the world she'd inhabited all her life, the world where people had
once prided themselves on thinking before they rushed to judgement, and
about her grandson, blinded by a person she didn't scruple to call a terrorist.
Both men were affected by the story. Libor was, too, she said, but the last
time she saw him he seemed to turn his back on it. That was the way of
things, he had told her. That was what happened to Jews. Change your tune.

'Libor said that?' Treslove asked.
She nodded.
'Then he was in a worse way than I realised,' he said. The emotion which
had been misting up his eyes ever since he had seen Libor's coffin lowered
into the earth began to choke him.

Finkler,  too,  found  it  hard  to  find  words.  He  remembered  all  the
arguments he'd had with Libor on the subject. And it pleased him not at all
that Libor had surrendered at the last. Some arguments you don't have in
order that you will win.

Finkler  and  Emmy  Oppenstein  wished  each  other  long  life  on  parting.
Hephzibah  had  told  Treslove  of  this  custom.  At  a  funeral  Jews  wish  one
another long life. It is a vote for life's continuance in the face of death.

He turned to Emmy Oppenstein. 'I wish you long life,' he said, looking

up.

6

Treslove, who has always dreamed, dreams that he is beckoned to a death
chamber. The room is dark and smells. Not of death but food. The remains
of  lamb  chops  which  have  been  left  out  too  long.  To  be  precise  it  is  the
sweet  smell  of  lamb  fat  he  can  smell.  Strange,  because  he  recalls  Libor
saying that he could never bear to eat lamb as a consequence of adopting as
a childhood pet a lamb which had nibbled grass in a field behind his house
in Bohemia. 'Baaa,' the lamb had said to little Libor. And 'Baaa,' little Libor
had said back. Once you've conversed with a lamb you can't eat it, Libor
had explained. Same with any other animal.

In his dream, Treslove wonders what St Francis found to eat.
He doesn't doubt he has come to pay his last respects to Libor but dreads

seeing him. He is afraid of the face of death.

To  his  horror,  a  weak  voice  calls  him  from  the  bed.  'Julian,  Julian.  A

word . . . come.'

The voice is not Libor's. It is Finkler's. Faint, but decidedly Finkler's.
Treslove  knows  what  he  is  going  to  hear.  Finkler  is  playing  their  old
clever-clogs schoolyard game. 'If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,' he is
going to say, 'absent thee from felicity awhile . . .'

And Treslove will say back, 'Felicity? Who's Felicity?'
He approaches the bed.
'Closer,' Finkler says. The voice strong suddenly.
Treslove  does  as  he  is  told.  When  he  is  close  enough  to  feel  Finkler's
breath,  Finkler  sits  up  and  spits  in  his  face,  a  violent  stream  of  filth  -
phlegm, sour wine, lamb fat, vomit.

Treslove  knows  his  way,  by  now,  around  his  dreams.  So  he  doesn't  even
bother to ask himself whether it was really a dream or just a vivid dread.

'That's for Tyler,' he says.
 

It was both.
Or whether the dread was half desire.
Aren't all dreads half desires?

He had begun to wake to the old sense of absurd loss again. Searching for
the acute disappointment he felt and locating it in a sporting catastrophe: a
tennis  player  he  didn't  care  about  losing  to  another  tennis  player  he  had
never heard of; the English cricket team being defeated by an innings and
several  hundred  runs  on  the  Indian  subcontinent;  a  football  match,  any
football match, ending in a gross injustice; even a golfer losing his nerve on
the final hole - golf a game he neither played nor followed.

It wasn't that sport allowed him to deflect his melancholy; sport spoke for

his melancholy. Its vanity of expectation was his vanity of expectation.

He had discerned something Jewish in this, an avid reaching after setback
and frustration, like supporting Tottenham Hotspur as some of Hephzibah's
Jewish friends did, but now he was not so sure.

He was seeing too many dawns. Dawns did not suit Treslove.
'What you'd prefer is a dawn that happens at about midday,' Hephzibah
had  joked  when  she  first  discovered  his  fear  of  them.  She  loved  them
herself and in their first months together would wake him to see. One of the
advantages of her high-terraced apartment was that she could walk directly
out of her bedroom and catch the wonderful panorama of a London dawn. It

was a measure of how much he loved her that he would wake the moment
she shook him and step out on to the terrace with her and gasp at the glory
of  it  as  he  knew  she  wanted  him  to.  The  dawn  was  their  element.  Their
creation. Treslove the new-born happy man and Jew. As long as the dawn
broke  all  was  well  in  their  world.  And  not  just  their  world.  The  whole
world.

Well, the dawn still broke but their world was no longer well. He loved
her no less. She had not disenchanted him. Nor he, he hoped, her. But Libor
was  dead.  Finkler  was  dying  in  his  dreams  and,  if  appearances  were
anything to go by, putrefying in his life. And, he, Treslove, was no Jew. For
which, perhaps, he should have been grateful. This was not a good time to
be  a  Jew.  Never  had  been,  he  knew  that.  Not  even  if  you  went  back  a
thousand,  two  thousand  years.  But  he  had  thought  it  would  at  least  be  a
good time for him to be a Jew.

You  can't,  though,  can  you,  have  one  happy  Jew  in  an  island  of
apprehensive or ashamed ones? Least of all when that Jew happens to be
Gentile.

Now  he  was  rising  early  not  because  Hephzibah  woke  him  to  see  the
beauty  of  the  daybreak  but  because  he  couldn't  sleep.  So  these  were
reluctant,  resented  dawns.  Hephzibah  was  right  about  their  spendour.  But
not about their breaking. The verb was wrong. It suggested too sudden and
purposeful  a  disclosure.  From  her  terrace  the  great  London  dawn  bled
slowly into sight, a thin line of red blood leaking out between the rooftops,
appearing at the windows of the buildings it had infiltrated, one at a time, as
though in a soundless military coup. On some mornings it was as though a
sea of blood rose from the city floor. Higher up, the sky would be mauled
with rough blooms of deep blues and burgundies like bruising. Pummelled
into light, the hostage day began.

Treslove, wrapped in a dressing gown, paced the terrace drinking tea that

was too hot for him.

There  was  disgrace  in  it.  He  wasn't  sure  whose.  Just  the  being  part  of
nature, maybe. Just the not having got beyond its rising tide of blood after
all these hundreds of thousands of years of trying. Or was it the city that
was  a  disgrace?  The  illusion  of  civility  it  stood  for?  Its  faceless
indomitability,  like  the  blank,  mulish  obstinacy  of  a  child  that  wouldn't
learn its lesson? Which one had swallowed up Libor as though he had never
been, and would soon swallow up the rest of them? Who was to blame?

Alternatively, the disgrace was himself, Julian Treslove, who looked like
everyone and everybody but was in fact no one and nobody. He sipped his
tea,  scalding  his  tongue.  Such  specificity  as  he  sought  -  if  someone  as
indeterminate  as  he  was  could  ever  be  called  specific  -  was  unnecessary.
The disgrace was universal. Just to be a human animal was to be a disgrace.
Life was a disgrace, an absurd disgrace, to be exceeded in disgracefulness
only by death.

Hephzibah  heard  him  get  up  and  go  outside  and  didn't  want  to  follow
him.  There  was  no  longer  any  charm  in  sharing  the  dawn  with  him.  You
know when the person you're living with finds life disgraceful.

She would not have been human had she not asked herself whether it was
her  fault.  Not  so  much  what  she  had  done  as  what  she  had  failed  to  do.
Treslove was another in a long line of men who needed saving. Were they
the only men who came to her - the lost, the floundering, the dispossessed?
Or was there no other sort?

Either  way  their  demands  wearied  her.  Who  did  they  think  she  was  -
America? Give  me  your  tired,  your  poor  .  .  .  the  wretched  refuse  of  your
teeming  shore.  She  looked  strong  and  secure  enough  to  house  them,  that
was the problem. She looked capacious. She looked like safe harbour.

Well, Treslove, for one, had that wrong. She hadn't saved him. Perhaps he

wasn't savable.

Much of it was about Libor, she knew that. He had still not grasped it.
For reasons she didn't understand, he appeared to blame himself. On top of
which,  quite  simply,  he  missed  Libor's  company.  Therefore  she  had  no
business  barging  in  and  asking,  'Anything  I've  done,  honey?'  The  decent
thing was to leave him alone for a while. She could use the privacy herself.
She too was grieving. But still she wondered and was sorry.

On top of which, the museum . . .
She  was  growing  increasingly  anxious  about  the  opening.  Not  because
the building would still be unfinished - that didn't matter - but because the
atmosphere was wrong. People wanted to hear less of Jews right now, not
more. There are times when you open your doors, and there are times when
you close them. Had there been only herself to consider, Hephzibah would
have bricked the museum up.

All she could do was hope that the world would, on a whim, change its
tune, that the ugly talk would somehow stop of its own accord, that a gust

of fresh wind would blow clean away the deadly miasmas poisoning Jews
and their endeavours.

So hope was what she did.
Head down, eyes lowered, fingers crossed.

7

Except  that  it  wasn't  in  her  nature  to  submit  passively  to  events.  She
couldn't leave the matter where her masters, the philanthropic sponsors of
the  museum,  wanted  her  to  leave  it.  Again,  she  urged  the  badness  of  the
timing. A postponement would be embarrassing, but not exactly unheard of.
They could cite building delays. The economy. Somebody's ill health. Her
ill health.

That would be no lie. She wasn't in good mental health. She was reading
what it did her no good to read - the wild proliferation of conspiracy theory,
Jews  planning  9/11,  Jews  bringing  down  the  banks,  Jews  poisoning  the
world  with  pornography,  Jews  harvesting  body  organs,  Jews  faking  their
own Holocaust.

Holocaust fucking Holocaust. She felt about the word Holocaust as she
felt  about  the  word  anti-Semite  -  she  cursed  those  who  reduced  her  to
wearing it out. But what to do? There was blackmail in the wind. Shut up
about  your  fucking  Holocaust,  they  were  saying,  or  we  will  deny  it  ever
happened. Which meant she couldn't shut up about it.

The Holocaust had become negotiable. She had recently run into her ex-
husband - not Abe the attorney, but Ben the blasphemous, actor, raconteur
and liar (funny how you no sooner ran into one unreliable ex-husband than
you ran into another) - and had listened to him spin a hellish tale about his
sleeping  with  a  Holocaust  denier  and  negotiating  numbers  in  return  for
favours. He'd come down a million if she'd do this to him, but would want
to put a million back in return for doing that to her.

'I felt like Whatshisname,' he told her.
'Give me a clue.'
'The one who had a list.'
'Ko-Ko?'
'Did I tell you I once played the Mikado, in Japan?'
'A thousand times.'
'Did I? I'm humiliated. But not him. The other list man.'

'Schindler?'
'Schindler,  yes  -  only  in  my  case  I  was  saving  those  already

exterminated.'

'That's foul, Ben,' she had said. 'That could be the foulest joke, no, those

could be the foulest two jokes, I've ever heard.'

'Who's  joking?  That's  the  way  of  it  out  there  now.  The  Holocaust  has
become a commodity you trade. There's a Spanish mayor who's cancelled
his  town's  Holocaust  Memorial  Day  because  of  Gaza,  as  though  they're
somehow connected.'

'I know. The implication being that the dead of Buchenwald only get to
be  memorialised  if  the  living  of  Tel  Aviv  behave  themselves.  But  I  don't
believe you.'

'What don't you believe?'
'That  you  slept  with  a  Holocaust  denier.  Even  you  couldn't  have  done

that.'

'I did it out of honourable motives. I hoped I might fuck her to death.'
'Why didn't you just strangle her without fucking her?'
'I'm Jewish.'
'It's  allowed  with  Holocaust  deniers.  It's  more  than  allowed,  it's
obligatory. The Eleventh Commandment - Thou shalt wring the necks of all
deniers for denial is an abomination.'

'Probably  is,  but  I  also  wanted  to  reform  her.  Like  with  hookers.  You

know me -'

'Still soft hearted -'
He'd have kissed her had she let him.
'Still soft-hearted,' he said.
'And did you?'
'Did I what?'
'Reform her.'
'No, but I got her up to 3 million.'
'What did you have to do for that?'
'Don't ask.'
She didn't tell her bosses the Ben story. You never knew what a Jew was

or was not going to find funny.

As  for  the  Museum,  it  would  open  when  they  wanted  it  to  open.  You

couldn't run scared. Not in the twenty-first century. Not in St John's Wood.

THIRTEEN

1

On mornings when the disgrace was too great to bear, and too insulting for
poor  Hephzibah  to  have  to  witness,  Treslove  put  on  a  coat,  left  the
apartment  and  walked  through  the  park  to  Libor's  place.  He  still  called  it
Libor's place. There was no fancy in this. He didn't expect that he would see
Libor at the window. But something of Libor remained harboured there, as
he feared that something of his own disgrace still lingered on Hephzibah's
terrace though in actual person he had left it.

At this time, Regent's Park was the property of joggers, dog owners and
geese. The fowl all had their hour. In the early morning the geese were in
possession, taking to the dry land with their beaks, pecking at the earth for
what was theirs. Later on it would be the herons' turn, and then the swans'
and  then  the  ducks'.  It  would  have  been  good,  Treslove  thought,  had
humans learned to apportion their lives similarly. Never mind fighting over
land, simply parcel out the days. Muslims in the morning, Gentiles in the
afternoon, Jews at night. Or some other ordering. It didn't matter who got
when, only that they all got a part.

The park was the biggest outdoor space for thinking in London, bigger
even than Hampstead where too many thinkers jostled with you for thought
room.  Some  mornings  Treslove  believed  he  was  the  only  person  in  the
entire  park  thinking  -  simply  thinking,  not  thinking  while  running,  or
thinking  while  walking  a  dog,  but  doing  nothing  but  thinking.  He  would
send  his  thoughts  out  at  one  end  of  the  park  and  meet  them  again  at  the
other, borne along by the otherwise unoccupied trees - as telegraph poles
transmit the human voice. The same thoughts which he'd brought into the
park waiting for him as he left it.

And what then did these mornings of free, unimpeded thinking amount

It  was  not  purposeful  thinking,  it  was  just  thinking.  Reliving  himself.

Thinking meaning existing in his head.

to?

Nothing.
Zero.

Gornisht.
He'd  had  a  fancy  when  he'd  first  taken  up  with  Hephzibah  that  they
would walk together to the lake, sit on a bench for half an hour, watch the
herons, talk about Jews and Nature - why the Bible was so light in natural
description, why even Paradise was sketchy in the matter of vegetation etc.
-  and  wait  for  Libor  to  join  them.  Whereupon,  after  much  exchange  of
kisses, Hephzibah would leave to go to the museum and Libor and Treslove
would  stroll  together  arm  in  arm  like  a  pair  of  elderly  Austro-Hungarian
gentlemen,  swapping  anecdotes  in  a  Yiddish  in  which  Treslove  would  by
then have become wonderfully proficient. Later they would sit again on a
bench  by  the  lake  and  Libor  would  explain  why  Jews  were  so  expert  at
living in the city. Treslove had lived in the metropolis all his life but did not
'exude'  it  as  Libor  did.  As  the  geese  were  to  Regent's  Park  lake,  so  was
Libor to the streets around it. And yet he hadn't even been born here and
mispronounced half the English words he used. Treslove not only wanted
that skill explained, he wanted to be told how it could be acquired.

If  this  fancy  was  idle,  only  circumstance  had  made  it  so.  Hephzibah
being  busy,  Treslove  being  forgetful,  the  weather  being  inclement,  and
Libor being unwilling, unable and eventually vanishing from Treslove's life
like an unheeded ghost. But he, Treslove, had wanted it intensely. It was to
be  a  way  of  living.  Not  a  path  to  a  new  way  of  living,  though  he  saw
himself emerging from it as a different person, but the new life itself. This
is what it would consist of - the walks with Hephzibah and Libor in their
demi-Eden, however unappreciated from the point of view of nature, a Jew
on each arm and a Jew, of sorts, in the middle.

Well, the symmetry was broken now. But in truth it had only ever been
Treslove's idea and no one else's. Only Treslove was looking for a way out
or a way in. Libor had taken his. And Hephzibah had been happy where she
was until Treslove had turned up to idealise her into misery.

So every walk in the park was now a memorial walk to the new life that
had not materialised. Anyone observing him - though no one did observe
him, because dog walkers care only for what's at the end of their leads and
joggers care only for their heartbeat - would have taken him to be a man in
mourning.

What they would not have known was how much and how many he was

in mourning for.

 

What it was on this particular day that made him return to the park after he
had completed his pilgrimage to Libor's - what made this day different from
all  other  days  -  he  couldn't  have  said.  He  had  followed  his  usual  course,
rubbing  at  the  itch  of  memory,  coming  out  at  the  gate  closest  to  Libor's
apartment, where he would stand and look up for half an hour, identifying
the windows with the rooms behind them, and the rooms with what he had
done  or  seen  in  them:  Malkie  playing  Schubert,  the  countless  animated
dinner parties, Libor's heavy furniture, Libor's initialled bedroom slippers,
Libor and Finkler jousting over Isrrrae, seeing Hephzibah for the first time -
'Call me Juno if it would be easier for you'. He had only happy memories of
Libor's apartment, no matter that he had shed many a tear there and been
mugged a few hundred yards from it, for that, too, was a happy memory in
that it had led more or less directly to Hephzibah.

What  he  would  normally  do  then  was  walk  briskly  past  the  BBC,  that
rathole of a place of which he had not a single happy memory, linger a little
outside  the  window  of  J.  P.  Guivier,  breathe  in  the  cigar  smells  that  still
clung to the brickwork of the street in which his father had had his shop,
stop for coffee, indulge a little melancholy for the hell of it - too much time
on his hands, that was the problem, too much waiting for whatever it was to
happen  -  and  eventually  go  home  in  a  taxi.  But  today,  the  weather  being
more  inviting  than  it  had  been  for  weeks,  with  great  puffball  clouds
tumbling  through  the  sky,  he  took  twice  the  time  to  do  all  these  things,
decided he would have an expiatory lunch in the salt-beef bar where he had
violated Libor's hearing, and then that he would return to the park and walk
home  slowly  the  way  he  had  come.  By  mid-afternoon  he  was  tired  and
surprised himself by snoozing on a bench like an old tramp. He woke with a
neck ache, his chin bobbing on his chest. He had taken a circuitous route
back, deliberately not hurrying, through a wilder stretch of park. He didn't
normally  like  it  here.  It  didn't  feel  like  London,  or  it  felt  like  the  wrong
London.  It  smelt  of  trouble,  though  all  that  ever  happened  was  that
Brazilian boys played thirty-a-side football against Polish boys and made a
lot of noise.

It was noise that must have woken him. A crowd of schoolchildren of all
colours  and  sexes  was  shouting  something  he  couldn't  quite  hear,  but  it
wasn't a jumbled shout, it was the repetition of a phrase, the repetition itself
being a sort of taunt. But who they were taunting he couldn't see either.

Nothing to do with him, and although he knew an adult no longer dared
disperse  a  crowd  of  schoolchildren,  no  matter  how  great  their  mischief,
because the chances were that at least one of them would be armed with a
machete, he left the bench as though on business of his own - little as he
knew of having business of his own - and tried to get a little closer to them.

Big mistake, he thought, even as he was making it.

2

In the middle of the circle of schoolchildren was a youth of about fifteen in
a  black  suit,  lanky,  rather  pretty  in  a  Spanish  and  Portuguese  way,  with
blue-black sidelocks, fringes spilling from his shirt, a boy's fedora on his
head - no, not a boy's fedora, for there was nothing boyish about him, but a
small man's fedora. That's what he was - a small Sephardic Jew. A holy man
in all but age.

Revulsion swept through Treslove.
As, presumably, it had swept through the children. The phrase they were

taunting him with was, 'It's a Jew!'

'It's a Jew!' they cried. 'It's a Jew!'
As though they had made a discovery. Look what's turned up, look what

we've found, out of its natural habitat.

It.
The schoolchildren didn't look capable of a lynching. Not from the best
of  schools,  Treslove  calculated,  but  not  from  the  worst  of  schools  either.
The boys didn't appear to be armed. The girls were not foul-mouthed. There
was a limit to the menace. They wouldn't kill the boy. They would just prod
him the way you might prod something foreign washed up on a beach. 'It's a
Jew!'

The  holy  man  in  all  but  age  -  the  holy  boy  -  was  distressed  but  not
terrified. He, too, seemed to know they would not kill him. But this could
not be allowed to continue, whatever he thought. Unsure how to proceed,
Treslove looked around. A woman his age, walking a dog, caught his eye.
This cannot be allowed to continue, her look said. Treslove nodded.

'Hey, what's going on?' the woman with the dog shouted.
'Hey!' Treslove shouted.
The schoolchildren weighed up the situation. Maybe it was the woman's
dog that decided them. Maybe they just wanted to be shown a way out of

this themselves.

'We're just messing about,' one of them said.
'Shoo!' the woman said, bringing her dog forward. It was only a terrier,

with a bemused upper-class Bertie Wooster expression, but a dog's a dog.

'Shoo yourself,' one of the girls told her.
'Cunt!' shouted a boy, backing off.
'Hey!' Treslove shouted.
'We  were  only  being  friendly,'  another  girl  said.  She  made  it  sound  as
though these two busybodies had gone and lost the Jew a whole new bunch
of chums.

They broke up and withdrew, not all at once but a bit at a time, like the
tide  receding  from  the  outlandish  thing  it  had  washed  up.  Left  alone,  the
outlandish thing went on its way. He didn't thank the woman or Treslove or
even the woman's dog. Probably against his religion, Treslove thought. But
for a fleeting second Treslove caught his beautiful coal-black eye. The boy
was not angry. Treslove wasn't even sure he'd been afraid. What Treslove
saw in his face was accustomedness.

'You OK?' Treslove asked.
The boy shrugged. It was almost an insolent gesture. This is simply the
way of it, the shrug said. Don't make a fuss. With maybe a touch of proud,
God-protected,  stand-offishness  in  it.  He  finds  me  an  unclean  thing,
Treslove thought.

Treslove  rolled  his  eyes  at  the  woman.  She  did  the  same  to  him.  Go

figure these kids.

was, he discovered, shaking.

Treslove  returned  to  the  bench  on  which  he'd  been  dozing  earlier.  He

He couldn't get the phrase out of his head. It's a Jew!
But he was battling other phrases of his own. Then why dress like that?
Then why present yourself to them? And why couldn't you thank us? And
why did you look at me as though to you I too am an 'it'?

One  of  the  girls  had  not  run  off  with  the  others.  She  lingered,  looking
about her. Treslove had the dread thought that she was going to try to pick
him up. Maybe offer him services for pocket money. He must have looked
an easy touch, sitting on the bench, shaking

She bent down, not looking at him, to take off her shoes. It was at that
moment that he recognised her. She was the schoolgirl in his once recurring
dream  -  once  recurring  before  Hephzibah,  that  is  -  the  schoolgirl  who

paused  in  her  running  to  take  off  the  shoes  that  impeded  her  -  whether
vulnerable  or  resolute  in  her  pleated  skirt,  white  blouse,  blue  jumper  and
artfully twisted tie, he had never been able to decide. The schoolgirl in a
hurry of which he hadn't ever known if he would like to be the object.

'Why are you taking off your shoes?' he asked.
She surveyed him as though it would have been obvious to anyone but a
moron  why  she  was  taking  off  her  shoes:  in  order  to  scrape  him  off  the
bottoms.

'Freak!' she said, contorting her face at him, and then running off through

the grass.

It's a freak.
Nothing personal, then. It's a freak, it's a Jew. Just whoever wasn't them.
Not worth anybody dying for.
Or was the opposite the truth: Not worth anybody living for?

3

It was early evening by the time he got back to the apartment. He'd needed
a drink.

It was a good job that no fragile shiksa with a watery Ophelia expression
had come into the bar in which he drank. He might have taken her back into
the park and drowned them both.

The apartment was oddly quiet. No Hephzibah. He went looking for her.
No Hephzibah in the kitchen, no Hephzibah sprawled out in the living room
watching television and wondering where he'd been, no Hephzibah in the
bedroom  in  an  oriental  housecoat  and  with  a  rose  between  her  teeth,  no
Hephzibah  in  the  bathroom.  But  he  could  smell  her  perfume.  One  of  her
wardrobe doors was open and there were shoes scattered on the floor. She
had gone out.

Then, as though a stone had been thrown at his temples, he remembered.
It was the museum night. The launch. The Grand Opening, as Hephzibah
had  refused  to  call  it.  Jesus  Christ!  They  were  meant  to  be  there  at  five
thirty,  the  doors  opening  for  guests  at  six  fifteen.  Early  had  been
Hephzibah's instruction. Early and brief. Get in, get out, attracting as little
attention as possible. Even the invitations had been insignificant and posted
late.  Normally,  as  Treslove  had  observed  to  Hephzibah,  Jews  loved
invitations.  They  were  totemic,  invariably  embossed  in  gold  Gothic

lettering on thick slabs of card, over-enthusiastic in expression and sent out
months in advance. Come to a party! Start thinking about a present! Start
planning  your  wardrobe!  Start  losing  weight!  Hephzibah  made  sure  her
invitation was small and flimsy and crept into the world.

He had not promised her he would not be late. There was no need. He
was never late. Most of the time he didn't leave the apartment. And he did
not forget arrangements.

So why was he late, and why had he forgotten this arrangement?
He knew what Hephzibah would say. She would say he forgot because he
wanted to forget. Not for her to reason why. Because he had fallen out of
love  with  her,  perhaps.  Because  he  was  irrationally  jealous  of  his  friend.
Because he had begun to oppose the museum in his heart.

She  had  not  left  him  a  note.  That,  to  Treslove,  suggested  a  very  high
degree of anger and hurt. He had cut her out without a word; she would do
the same.

always been good at. What was one more?

He wondered if it was all over between them. Libor's doing, if so. There
are some events which make it impossible to go back to where you were.
After Libor, who had brought them together, nothing. Not impossibly, that
was  his  intention.  Those  whom  I  have  joined  together  I  will  put  asunder.
Treslove sympathised with Libor's reasoning. Libor had discovered him to
be a sneak and a fornicator and a braggart. He had fouled Finkler's nest and
would foul Libor's via Hephzibah. What did he want with them, this cuckoo
goy? Sucking at their tragedy because his own life was a farce. Go home,
Julian. Go back to where you came from. Leave us in peace.

He  sat  on  the  edge  of  his  bed,  his  head  banging,  agreeing  with  that
judgement.  His  life  had  been  a  farce.  Every  element  of  it  ludicrous.  And
yes, it was true, he had tried to nose his way into other people's tragedy and
grandeur since he couldn't lay hands on any of his own. He had meant no
harm or disrespect by it, quite the contrary; but it was theft all right.

'It's a Jew!' the schoolchildren had laughed, and Treslove had taken the
taunt personally. It had been as a spear in his own side. But what, beyond
the obligation as an adult to clip every one of the little mamzers round the
ear, did any of it have to do with him? Why had he staggered from his park
bench like a wounded beast, and gone looking for alcohol? To take away
the pain of what?

Time for another goodbye, then. Why not? Goodbyes were what he had

He watched his life go in a variety of directions. It was like being drunk.
Being drunk was like being drunk. Maybe he would lurch out of the door
and never be seen again. Maybe he would pack a case and go back to his
Hampstead  flat  which  was  not  in  Hampstead.  Maybe  he  would  throw  on
some clothes and dash over to the museum. 'Sorry, darling, am I in time for
a last kosher canape?'

One of those illusory fits of exhilaration to which purposeless men are
susceptible seized him. The world was all before him, where to choose his
place of rest. Lurching out of the door and vanishing was favourite. There
was  honour  in  it  as  well  as  wildness.  Gifting  Hephzibah  his  absence  and
gifting  himself  his  liberty.  Let's  go,  he  thought.  Let's  be  on  our  way.  He
would have punched the air had he been a man who punched the air.

But the sight of Hephzibah's shoes in a tangle touched him. He loved the
woman.  She  had  synced  him  up  with  the  universe.  She  might  not  ever
forgive him for what he'd done but he owed her, owed himself, owed them
both, a second chance. He showered quickly, put on a black suit, and ran
out.

The darkness shocked him. He checked his watch. Eight forty-five! How
had that happened? It was just after seven when he got back from the park.
Where had the time gone? Was it possible he had passed out on the bed,
between  imagining  making  a  run  for  it,  and  remembering  how  much  he
loved  her  through  her  shoes?  He  must  have.  There  was  no  other
explanation.  He  had  fallen  asleep  for  the  second  time  that  day  and  not
known it. He was not in charge of himself. Things happened to him. He was
not the agent of his own life. He wasn't even living his own life.

It was only a ten-minute walk but it was fraught with dangers. The lamp
posts were rearing up at him again. He imagined colliding with trees and
pillar  boxes.  There  was  too  much  traffic  on  the  road,  all  going  too  fast.
Buses laboured up the incline. Behind them cars pulled out on nothing other
than  a  hunch  that  it  was  safe  for  them  to  do  so.  Every  bone  in  his  body
ached in anticipation of the impact.

He  tried  not  to  read  the  Arab  graffiti  on  the  walls  of  the  Beatles'  old

recording studio.

It was about nine when he arrived at the museum. The lights were on in
the  building  and  a  small  number  of  people  -  perhaps  a  dozen  -  were
congregated  outside.  Congregated  was  not,  perhaps, 
the  word.
Congregation suggests intention and he wasn't sure there was any reason for

these  people  to  be  there.  He  had  half  expected  to  see  banners.  Death  to
Jewzs.  Cartoons  of  glutton-Yids  devouring  babies  and  Stars  of  David
metamorphosing  into  swastikas.  Such  images  were  no  longer  even
shocking.  You  could  find  them  inside,  or  even  on  the  covers  of  the  most
reputable publications. The streets had been full these last few weeks with
stray  demonstrators  from  Trafalgar  Square  and  the  Israeli  Embassy,  the
human shrapnel of a deafening barrage of outrage, and Treslove would not
have been surprised to see them here, hoping to get the attention of one or
other  of  Hephzibah's  important  Jewish  guests,  an  ambassador,  an  MP,  a
pillar of the community. Stop the massacre. Condemn the carnage. Kill the
Jewzs. But everything appeared quiet and orderly. There wasn't even, as far
as  he  could  see,  an  ASHamed  Jew  come  out  to  protest  his  hang-dog
dissolidarity with his own people.

Finkler? Was Finkler in or out? Finkler hidden in the small crowd, biding
his time, or in the building, Hephzibah's proxy escort since her real one had
let her down?

It  was  a  Finkler  event.  Sam  had  a  more  natural  right  to  be  inside  than

Treslove did.

He wasn't outside, anyway. These were just smokers, Treslove decided.

Or people come out to get some air.

He walked around them to the entrance where a couple of security men
asked  to  see  his  invitation.  He  didn't  have  it.  There  was  no  reason,  he
explained, for him to be carrying an invitation. He was not a guest. He was
virtually the host.

Entrance was strictly by invitation only, they told him. No invitation, no
party.  He  explained  that  it  wasn't  a  party.  It  was  a  reception.  See!  -  how
would  he  know  it  was  a  reception  and  not  a  party  if  he  was  merely  a
stranger looking for trouble? He could tell them what was in every room.
Go on, test me. Hephzibah Weizenbaum, the director of the museum, was
his partner. Perhaps if someone could notify her he was here . . .

They shook their heads. He wondered if she'd warned them not to let him

in. Or maybe they smelt alcohol on his breath.

'Come  on,  guys,'  he  said,  attempting  to  push  past  them,  but  non-
aggressively, a sort of ironic sidle. The bigger of the two grabbed him by
his arm.

'Hey!' Treslove said. 'That's assault.'

He  turns  in  the  hope  of  encountering  a  sympathetic  face.  Perhaps
someone  who  recognises  him  and  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  what  he's
saying.  But  he  finds  himself  looking  into  the  wild  eyes  of  the  grizzled
warrior Jew in the PLO scarf who parks his motorbike in the forecourt of
the synagogue he can see from the terrace of Hephzibah's apartment. Ah, he
thinks.  Ah!  He  gets  it.  These  people  are  not,  after  all,  smokers  or  guests
from the reception come out to take the air. They are holding a silent vigil.
A woman is carrying a blown-up photograph of an Arab family. A mother, a
father, a baby. Next to her, a man carries a candle. They themselves might
be Arabs, but not all the party are. The grizzled biker in the PLO scarf, for
example. He is not an Arab.

'So what's this?' Treslove asks.
They ignore him. No one wants trouble. The security man who grabbed
Treslove's arm approaches him again. 'I'm going to have to ask you to move
on, sir,' he says.

'Are you Jewish?' Treslove asks.
'Sir,' the security man says.
'I'm asking you a civil question,' Treslove says. 'Because if you're Jewish
I want to know why you're allowing this demonstration to go ahead. This is
not an embassy. And if you're not Jewish I want to know what you're doing
here at all.'

'It's  not  a  demonstration,'  the  man  holding  the  candle  says.  'We're  just

here.'

'You're  just  here.  I  can  see  that,'  Treslove  says.  'But  why  are  you  just
here? This is a Jewish museum. It's a place of study and reflection. It isn't
the fucking West Bank. We're not at war here.'

Someone takes hold of him. He is not sure who. Perhaps two people take
hold  of  him.  They  might  be  the  security  men,  they  might  not.  Treslove
knows where this must end. He is not frightened. The Sephardic boy was
not  frightened,  he  will  not  be  frightened.  He  sees  the  boy's  weary,
accustomed face. 'It's a Jew!' That's just the way of it. He sees the schoolgirl
bending to tie her shoelace. 'Freak!'

He lashes out. He doesn't care who he hits. Or who hits him. He would
like it to be, either way, the traitor in the PLO scarf. But if it isn't, it isn't. He
has no desire, though, to hit an Arab. He hears shouting. He would like it if
one of them pushed him up against a wall and said, 'You Ju!' It's heroic to
die a Jew. If you have to die for something, let it be for being Jewish. 'You

Ju,' and then the knife at your throat. That's what you call a serious death,
not the shit Treslove's been doing all his life.

Something presses in his ribs but it's not a knife. It's a fist. He punches
back.  They  are  struggling  now,  Treslove  and  he  is  not  sure  who  or  how
many. He hears a commotion, but it might be the commotion of his heart.
He  stumbles,  losing  his  footing  on  the  unlevel  ground.  Then  he  falls
headlong. Headlights blind him. Suddenly his shoulder hurts. He closes his
eyes.

When he opens them the Jew in the PLO scarf is bending over him. 'Are

you all right?' he asks.

Treslove  is  surprised  by  the  gentleness  of  his  manner.  He  would  have

expected him to spit fire, like his motor bike.

'Do you know where you are?' His questions are almost doctorly. Is that
what the madman is, Treslove wonders - an eminent Ju physician in a PLO
scarf?

He stares up at him, wondering if he's been recognised as the glowerer
from Hephzibah's terrace. Since this is Hephzibah's occasion the connection
would not be difficult to make.

But if the biker does recognise him, he doesn't let on. 'Do you know your

name?' he persists, still showing concern.

'Brad Pitt,' Treslove replies. 'What's yours?'
'Sydney.' His voice is cultivated and soothing. Patient. He takes off his
scarf and makes a pillow of it for Treslove's head. 'You were lucky he had
good brakes,' he says.

'Who?' Treslove asks, but doesn't hear the answer.
Rather than be beholden to Sydney, and whatever sickly cause of humane
self-abnegation he serves by wreathing himself in the scarf of his people's
enemies, Treslove wishes the brakes had not been so good.

Rather than be beholden to Treslove and the woman with the dog, had the

young Sephardic Jew wished, likewise, to be left to his tormentors?

Funny thing, ingratitude, Treslove thinks, closing his eyes again. It's been

a long day.

 

He is not badly hurt but the hospital keeps him in overnight. To be on the
safe side. Hephzibah visits but he is sleeping. 'Don't wake him,' she says.

She believes he knows she's there but doesn't want to acknowledge her.
She has become part of all that disgusts him. Like Libor, he wants out. She's

wrong. But it doesn't matter. What she might be wrong about today she will
be right about tomorrow.

EPILOGUE

Since Libor has no children, we will say Kaddish for him, Hephzibah and
Finkler had agreed. As a non-Jew, Treslove was not permitted to recite the
Jewish  prayer  for  the  dead  and  so  had  been  excluded  from  their
deliberations.
 
I am not a synagogue person, Hephzibah says. I cannot bear the business of
who you can and who you cannot say Kaddish for, where and when you sit,
let  alone  what  is  permitted  to  a  woman  and  how  that  differs  from  one
denomination of synagogue to another. Our religion does not exactly make
it easy for you. So I will pray at home.

And she does.
For the dead and the dead to her.
For Libor she cries her eyes dry.
For Julian, because she cannot in her heart exclude Julian, she cries bitter
tears that come from a part of her she doesn't recognise. She's cried for men
she's  loved  before.  But  with  them  it  was  the  finality  of  separation  that
pained  her.  With  Julian  it's  different:  was  he  ever  there  to  feel  separated
from? Was she just an experiment for him? Was he just an experiment for
her?

He'd told her she was his fate. Who wants to be somebody's fate?
 

It is less convenient for Samuel Finkler but perhaps more straightforward.
He must go to his nearest synagogue and say the prayer he first heard on his
own  father's  lips.  Yisgadal  viyiskadash  .  .  .  the  ancient  language  of  the
Hebrews  tolling  for  the  dead.  May  His  great  Name  grow  exalted  and
sanctified. This he does three times a day. When the deceased is not a parent
the  obligation  to  say  Kaddish  ceases  after  thirty  days  rather  than  eleven
months. But Finkler does not give up saying it after thirty days. No one can
make him. He is not sure he will even give up saying it after eleven months,
though he grasps the reasoning in favour of stopping: so that the souls of
the unlamented dead might find their way at last to Paradise. But he doesn't
think it will be his praying that prevents them getting there.

The beauty of the Kaddish, to his sense, is that it's non-specific. He can

simultaneously mourn as many of the dead as he chooses.

Tyler  at  last,  he  doesn't  know  why.  He  thinks  that  Libor  has  somehow

made that possible. Unloosed something.

Tyler whom he failed as a husband, Libor whom he failed as a friend.
Yisgadal  viyiskadash  .  .  .  It's  so  all-embracing  he  might  as  well  be

mourning the Jewish people.

Not  that  he  draws  the  line  at  Jews.  Even  Treslove  gets  a  look  in,  a
sideways glance of grief, though he is alive and well - as well as he ever can
be - and presumably back working as a lookalike.

It's from Hephzibah, with whom he is in frequent contact, that Samuel
Finkler takes his cue. Her sense of incompletion, of a thing not finished that
might never have begun, becomes his sense. He never really knew Treslove
either. And that too strikes him as a reason for lamentation.

There are no limits to Finkler's mourning.

A Note on the Author

 

An award-winning novelist and critic, Howard Jacobson was born in
Manchester  and  read  English  at  Cambridge  under  F.  R.  Leavis.  He
taught at the University of Sydney, Selwyn College, Cambridge, and
finally Wolverhampton Polytechnic - the inspiration for his first novel,
Coming  From  Behind.  Other  novels  include  The  Mighty  Walzer
(winner of the Bollinger Everyman Wodehouse Prize), Kalooki Nights
(longlisted  for  the  Man  Booker  Prize)  and,  most  recently,  the  highly
acclaimed The Act of Love. Howard Jacobson writes a weekly column
for 
Independent  and  has  written  and  presented  several
documentaries for television. He lives in London.

the 

By the Same Author

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fiction

Coming From Behind

Peeping Tom

Redback

The Very Model of a Man

No More Mister Nice Guy

The Mighty Walzer

Who's Sorry Now?

The Making of Henry

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Kalooki Nights

The Act of Love

Non-fiction

Shakespeare's Magnanimity (with Wilbur Sanders)

In the Land of Oz

Roots Schmoots: Journeys Among Jews

Seriously Funny: From the Ridiculous to the Sublime

Praise for The Finkler Question

"It is tempting--after reading something as fine as The Finkler Question--
not to bother reviewing it in any meaningful sense but simply to urge you to
put down this paper and go and buy as many copies as you can carry ... Full
of  wit,  warmth,  intelligence,  human  feeling  and  understanding.  It  is  also
beautifully written ... Indeed, there's so much that is first rate in the manner
of  Jacobson's  delivery  that  I  could  write  all  day  on  his  deployment  of
language without once mentioning what the book is about."

--Edward Docx, Observer (UK)
"Howard Jacobson [is] a writer able to recognise the humour in almost any
situation and a man as expansive as most on the nature of Jewishness."

--Gerald Jacobs, Telegraph (UK)
"This charming novel follows many paths of enquiry, not least the present
state  of  Jewish  identity  in  Britain  and  how  it  integrates  with  the  Gentile
population.  Equally  important  is  its  exploration  of  how  men  share
friendship. All of which is played out with Jacobson's exceptionally funny
riffs  and  happy-sad  refrains  ...  Jacobson's  prose  is  a  seamless  roll  of
blissfully  melancholic  interludes.  Almost  every  page  has  a  quotable,
memorable line."

--Christian House, Independent on Sunday (UK)

"Both an entertaining novel and a humane one."

--Henry Hitchings, Financial Times
"There are some great riffs and skits in The Finkler Question ... But at the
heart  of  the  book  is  Julian  the  wannabe  Jew,  a  wonderful  comic  creation
precisely because he is so tragically touching in his haplessness. The most
moving (and funniest) scenes are those in which he and Libor, the widower
with nothing more to live for, ruminate on love and Jewishness."

--Adam Lively, Sunday Times (UK)

"[A] bleakly funny meditation on loss, belonging and personal identity."

--Ross Gilfillan, Daily Mail (UK)
"For some writers a thorough investigation of the situation of British Jews
today might do as the subject for a single book. In The Finkler Question it's

combined  with  his  characteristically  unsparing--but  not  unkindly--
ruminations  on  love,  ageing,  death  and  grief.  He  also  manages  his
customary--but  not  easy--trick  of  fusing  all  of  the  above  with  genuine
comedy ... No wonder that, as with most of Jacobson's novels, you finish
The Finkler Question feeling both faintly exhausted and richly entertained."
--James Walton, Sunday Telegraph (UK)
"A  terrifying  and  ambitious  novel,  full  of  dangerous  shallows  and  dark,
deep water. It takes in the mysteries of male friendship, the relentlessness of
grief and the lure of emotional parasitism."

--Alex Clark, Guardian (UK)
"The Finkler Question  balances  precariously  a  bleak  moralising  with  life-
affirming humour."

--Bryan Cheyette, Independent (UK)
"Another masterpiece ... The Finkler Question is further proof, if any was
needed, of Jacobson's mastery of humour. But above all it is a testament to
his  ability  to  describe--perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  say  inhabit--the
personal and moral worlds of his disparate characters."

--Jonathan Beckman, Literary Review (UK)
"The Finkler Question is very funny, utterly original, and addresses a topic
of  contemporary  fascination  ...  The  writing  is  wonderfully  mobile,  and
inventive, and Jacobson's signature is to be found in every sentence ... The
Finkler Question is a remarkable work."

--Anthony Julius, Jewish Chronicle
"Jacobson is at the height of his powers ... As the men tussle with women
and  their  absence,  and  their  own  identities,  Jacobson's  wit  launches  a
fusillade of hard-punching apercus on human nature and its absurdities that
only he could have written."

--Ben Felsenberg, Metro (UK)
"The Finkler Question, which is as provocative as it is funny, as angry as it
is compassionate, offers a moving testimony to a dilemma as ancient as the
Old Testament. It also marks another memorable achievement for Jacobson,

"Jacobson  writes  perceptively  about  how  durable 
compounded, in large part, of envy, schadenfreude and betrayal."

--Matthew Syed, Times (UK)
friendships  are

a  writer  who  never  fires  blanks  and  whose  dialogue,  which  reads  like  an
exchange  between  Sigmund  Freud  and  Woody  Allen,  races  along  like  a
runaway train."

--Alan Taylor, Herald Scotland
"Howard  Jacobson's  latest  holler  from  the  halls  of  comic  genius  ...  The
opening chapters of this novel boast some of the wittiest, most poignant and
sharply  intelligent  comic  prose  in  the  English  language  ...  Jacobson's
brilliance thrives on the risk of riding death to a photo-finish, of writing for
broke. Exhilaration all the way."

--Tom Adair, Scotsman
"Here are three men who are in varying ways miserably womanless. This is
rich soil for comedy, and Jacobson tills it for every regretful laugh he can
muster ... Perhaps [Jacobson's] Leopold Bloom time has come at last."

--Irish Independent
"The Finkler Question is characterised by [Jacobson's] structuring skill and
unsimplifying  intelligence--this  time  picking  through  the  connections  and
differences,  hardly  unremarked  but  given  fresh  treatment  here,  between
vicariousness  and  parasitism,  and  between  Jewishness,  Judaism  and
Zionism."

--Leo Robson, New Statesman
"Full of caustic moments ... that are also, essentially, funny ... No matter the
book's  themes,  the  way  Jacobson  weds  humor  to  seriousness  makes  it
affecting for anyone."

--Eric Herschthal, Jewish Week

Copyright (c) 2010 by Howard Jacobson

 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever
without written permission from the publisher except in the case of brief quotations embodied in

critical articles or reviews. For information address Bloomsbury USA, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York,

NY 10010.

 

Published by Bloomsbury USA, New York

 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA HAS BEEN APPLIED FOR.

 

ISBN: 978-1-60819-611-1 (hardcover)

 

First published by Bloomsbury USA in 2010

This e-book edition published in 2010

 

E-book ISBN: 978-1-60819-612-8

 

www.bloomsburyusa.com

